28.5 • the formation and evolution of galaxies and structure in the universe 993 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1011_img1.jpeg] figure 28.29 growth of large-scale structure as calculated by supercomputers. the boxes show how filaments and superclusters of galaxies grow over time, from a relatively smooth distribution of dark matter and gas, with few galaxies formed in the first 2 billion years after the big bang, to the very clumpy strings of galaxies with large voids today. compare the last image in this sequence with the actual distribution of nearby galaxies shown in figure 28.21. (credit: modification of work by cxc/mpe/ v.springel) the box at left is labeled “big bang,” the box at center is unlabeled and the box at right is labeled “present”. a white arrow points from left to right representing the direction of time. scientists even have a model to explain how a nearly uniform, hot “soup” of particles and energy at the beginning of time acquired the swiss-cheese-like structure that we now see on the largest scales. as we will see in the big bang, when the universe was only a few hundred thousand years old, everything was at a temperature of a few thousand degrees.
theorists suggest that at that early time, all the hot gas was vibrating, much as sound waves vibrate the air of a nightclub with an especially loud band. this vibrating could have concentrated matter into high-density peaks and created emptier spaces between them. when the universe cooled, the concentrations of matter were “frozen in,” and galaxies ultimately formed from the matter in these high-density regions. the big picture to finish this chapter, let’s put all these ideas together to tell a coherent story of how the universe came to look the way it does. initially, as we said, the distribution of matter (both luminous and dark) was nearly, but not quite exactly, smooth and uniform. that “not quite” is the key to everything. here and there were lumps where the density of matter (both luminous and dark) was ever so slightly higher than average. initially, each individual lump expanded because the whole universe was expanding. however, as the universe continued to expand, the regions of higher density acquired still more mass because they exerted a slightly larger than average gravitational force on surrounding material. if the inward pull of gravity was high enough, the denser individual regions ultimately stopped expanding.
they then began to collapse into irregularly shaped blobs (that’s the technical term astronomers use!). in many regions the collapse was more rapid in one direction, so the concentrations of matter were not spherical but came to resemble giant clumps, pancakes, and rope-like filaments—each much larger than individual galaxies. these elongated clumps existed throughout the early universe, oriented in different directions and collapsing 994 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1012_img1.jpeg] at different rates. the clumps provided the framework for the large-scale filamentary and bubble-like structures that we see preserved in the universe today. the universe then proceeded to “build itself” from the bottom up. within the clumps, smaller structures formed first, then merged to build larger ones, like lego pieces being put together one by one to create a giant lego metropolis. the first dense concentrations of matter that collapsed were the size of small dwarf galaxies or globular clusters—which helps explain why globular clusters are the oldest things in the milky way and most other galaxies. these fragments then gradually assembled to build galaxies, galaxy clusters, and, ultimately, superclusters of galaxies.
according to this picture, small galaxies and large star clusters first formed in the highest density regions of all—the filaments and nodes where the pancakes intersect—when the universe was about two percent of its current age. some stars may have formed even before the first star clusters and galaxies came into existence. some galaxy-galaxy collisions triggered massive bursts of star formation, and some of these led to the formation of black holes. in that rich, crowded environment, black holes found constant food and grew in mass. the development of massive black holes then triggered quasars and other active galactic nuclei whose powerful outflows of energy and matter shut off the star formation in their host galaxies. the early universe must have been an exciting place! clusters of galaxies then formed as individual galaxies congregated, drawn together by their mutual gravitational attraction (figure 28.30). first, a few galaxies came together to form groups, much like our own local group. then the groups began combining to form clusters and, eventually, superclusters. this model predicts that clusters and superclusters should still be in the process of gathering together, and observations do in fact suggest that clusters are still gathering up their flocks of galaxies and collecting more gas as it flows in along filaments.