long strings of young, massive blue stars and hundreds of star formation regions glowing in the pink light of excited hydrogen gas are also results of the interaction. the ages of the star clusters range from 2 million to 1 billion years old, suggesting that there have been several different collisions within this group of galaxies, each leading to bursts of star formation. the three interacting members of stephan’s quintet are located at a distance of 270 million light-years. (b) most galaxies form new stars at a fairly slow rate, but members of a rare class known as starburst galaxies blaze with extremely active star formation. the galaxy ii zw 096 is one such starburst galaxy, and this combined image using both hubble and spitzer space telescope data shows that it is forming bright clusters of new stars at a prodigious rate. the blue colors show the merging galaxies in visible light, while the red colors show infrared radiation from the dusty region where star formation is happening. this galaxy is at a distance of 500 million light-years and has a diameter of about 50,000 light-years, about half the size of the milky way.
(credit a: modification of work by nasa, esa, and the hubble sm4 ero team; credit b: modification of work by nasa/ jpl-caltech/stsci) when astronomers finally had the tools to examine a significant number of galaxies that emitted their light 11 to 12 billion years ago, they found that these very young galaxies often resemble nearby starburst galaxies that are involved in mergers: they also have multiple nuclei and peculiar shapes, they are usually clumpier than normal galaxies today, with multiple intense knots and lumps of bright starlight, and they have higher rates of star formation than isolated galaxies. they also contain lots of blue, young, type o and b stars, as do nearby merging galaxies. galaxy mergers in today’s universe are rare. only about five percent of nearby galaxies are currently involved in interactions. interactions were much more common billions of years ago (figure 28.11) and helped build up the “more mature” galaxies we see in our time. clearly, interactions of galaxies have played a crucial role in their evolution.
968 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page986_img1.jpeg] figure 28.11 collisions of galaxies in a distant cluster. the large picture on the left shows the hubble space telescope image of a cluster of galaxies at a distance of about 8 billion light-years. among the 81 galaxies in the cluster that have been examined in some detail, 13 are the result of recent collisions of pairs of galaxies. the eight smaller images on the right are close-ups of some of the colliding galaxies. the merger process typically takes a billion years or so. (credit: modification of work by pieter van dokkum, marijn franx (university of groningen/leiden), esa and nasa) active galactic nuclei and galaxy evolution while galaxy mergers are huge, splashy events that completely reshape entire galaxies on scales of hundreds of thousands of light-years and can spark massive bursts of star formation, accreting black holes inside galaxies can also disturb and alter the evolution of their host galaxies.
you learned in active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes about a family of objects known as active galactic nuclei (agn), all of them powered by supermassive black holes. if the black hole is surrounded by enough gas, some of the gas can fall into the black hole, getting swept up on the way into an accretion disk, a compact, swirling maelstrom perhaps only 100 au across (the size of our solar system). within the disk the gas heats up until it shines brilliantly even in x-rays, often outshining the rest of the host galaxy with its billions of stars. supermassive black holes and their accretion disks can be violent and powerful places, with some material getting sucked into the black hole but even more getting shot out along huge jets perpendicular to the disk. these powerful jets can extend far outside the starry edge of the galaxy. agn were much more common in the early universe, in part because frequent mergers provided a fresh gas supply for the black hole accretion disks.