this cloud is warm (with a temperature of about 7000 k) and has a density of 0.3 hydrogen atom per cm3—higher than most of the local bubble but still so tenuous that it is also referred to as describe how interstellar matter is arranged around our solar system explain why scientists think that the sun is located in a hot bubble 690 20 • between the stars: gas and dust in space access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page708_img1.jpeg] local fluff (figure 20.20). (aren’t these astronomical names fun sometimes?) while this is a pretty thin cloud, we estimate that it contributes 50 to 100 times more particles than the solar wind to the diffuse material between the planets in our solar system. these interstellar particles have been detected and their numbers counted by the spacecraft traveling between the planets. perhaps someday, scientists will devise a way to collect them without destroying them and to return them to earth, so that we can touch—or at least study in our laboratories—these messengers from distant stars. figure 20.20 local fluff. the sun and planets are currently moving through the local interstellar cloud, which is also called the local fluff.
fluff is an appropriate description because the density of this cloud is only about 0.3 atom per cm3. in comparison, earth’s atmosphere at the edge of space has around 1.2 × 1013 molecules per cm3. this image shows the patches of interstellar matter (mostly hydrogen gas) within about 20 light-years of the sun. the temperature of the local interstellar cloud is about 7000 k. the arrows point toward the directions that different parts of the cloud are moving. the names associated with each arrow indicate the constellations located on the sky toward which the parts of the cloud are headed. the solar system is thought to have entered the local interstellar cloud, which is a small cloud located within a much larger superbubble that is expanding outward from the scorpius-centaurus region of the sky, at some point between 44,000 and 150,000 years ago and is expected to remain within it for another 10,000 to 20,000 years.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/goddard/adler/university chicago/wesleyan) 20.6 • interstellar matter around the sun 691 [image: astronomy_openstax_page709_img1.jpeg] key terms baryon cycle the cycling of mass in and out of the interstellar medium, including accretion of gas from intergalactic space, loss of gas back into intergalactic space, and conversion of interstellar gas into stars cosmic rays atomic nuclei (mostly protons) and electrons that are observed to strike earth’s atmosphere with exceedingly high energies.
h ii region the region of ionized hydrogen in interstellar space interstellar dust tiny solid grains in interstellar space thought to consist of a core of rocklike material (silicates) or graphite surrounded by a mantle of ices; water, methane, and ammonia are probably the most abundant ices interstellar extinction the attenuation or absorption of light by dust in the interstellar medium interstellar medium (ism) (or interstellar matter) the gas and dust between the stars in a galaxy local bubble (or local hot bubble) a region of low-density, million degree gas in which the sun and solar system are currently located local fluff a slightly denser cloud inside the local bubble, inside which the sun also lies molecular cloud a large, dense, cold interstellar cloud; because of its size and density, this type of cloud can keep ultraviolet radiation from reaching its interior, where molecules are able to form nebula a cloud of interstellar gas or dust; the term is most often used for clouds that are seen to glow with visible light or infrared reddening (interstellar) the reddening of starlight passing through interstellar dust because dust scatters blue light more effectively than red summary 20.1 the interstellar medium about 15% of the visible matter in the galaxy is in the form of gas and dust, serving as the raw material for new stars.