the sojourner rover, the first wheeled vehicle on mars, is about the size of a microwave oven. its flat top contains solar cells that provided electricity to run the vehicle. you can see the ramp from the lander and the path the rover took to the larger rock that the mission team nicknamed “yogi.” (credit: nasa/jpl) in 2003, nasa began a series of highly successful mars landers. twin mars exploration rovers (mer), named spirit and opportunity, have been successful far beyond their planned lifetimes. the design goal for the rovers was 600 meters of travel; in fact, they have traveled jointly more than 50 kilometers. after scouting around its rim, opportunity drove down the steep walls into an impact crater called victoria, then succeeded with some difficulty in climbing back out to resume its route (figure 10.15). dust covering the rovers’ solar cells caused a drop in power, but when a seasonal dust storm blew away the dust, the rovers resumed full operation. in order to survive winter, the rovers were positioned on slopes to maximize solar heating and power generation.
in 2006, spirit lost power on one of its wheels, and subsequently became stuck in the sand, where it continued operation as a fixed ground station. meanwhile, in 2008, phoenix (a spacecraft “reborn” of spare parts from a previous mars mission that had failed) landed near the edge of the north polar cap, at latitude 68°, and directly 336 10 • earthlike planets: venus and mars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page354_img1.jpeg] measured water ice in the soil. figure 10.15 victoria crater. (a) this crater in meridiani planum is 800 meters wide, making it slightly smaller than meteor crater on earth. note the dune field in the interior. (b) this image shows the view from the opportunity rover as it scouted the rim of victoria crater looking for a safe route down into the interior.
(credit a: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/university of arizona/ cornell/phio state university; credit b: modification of work by nasa/jpl/cornell) in 2011, nasa launched its largest (and most expensive) mars mission since viking (see figure 10.1). the 1-ton rover curiosity, the size of a subcompact car, has plutonium-powered electrical generators, so that it is not dependent on sunlight for power. curiosity made a pinpoint landing on the floor of gale crater, a site selected for its complex geology and evidence that it had been submerged by water in the past. previously, mars landers had been sent to flat terrains with few hazards, as required by their lower targeting accuracy. the scientific goals of curiosity include investigations of climate and geology, and assessment of the habitability of past and present mars environments. in 2018, nasa’s insight lander touched down on mars, carrying a suite of scientific instruments. these include a package (nicknamed “the mole”) that will dig into the surface of mars 1 mm at a time, hoping to reach a depth of 5 meters with heat sensors.
neither of these missions carries a specific life detection instrument, however. so far, scientists have not been able to devise a simple instrument that could distinguish living from nonliving materials on mars. the focus on the possibility of life returned with the 2020 launch of the large rover perseverance, the near-twin of curiosity. it landed in a former lakebed, and part of its mission is to drill into ancient sedimentary rocks and collect small samples of these rocks to be returned (by a later mission) to earth for laboratory study. nasa’s remarkable helicopter drone, named ingenuity, has acted like an airborne scout for this mission. this light- weight helicopter, whose rotors have to turn much faster in the thin martian air, has, as of the end of 2023, flown 69 missions (far more than planned), each about 1–2 minutes, but covering a total of 17 kilometers of distance and reaching altitudes as high as 24 meters. the curiosity rover required a remarkably complex landing sequence and nasa made a video (https://openstax.org/l/30curiosityrove) about it called “7 minutes of terror” that went viral on the internet.