since an astronomer at the prime focus can block much of the light coming to the main mirror, the use of a small secondary mirror allows more light to get through the system. figure 6.6 focus arrangements for reflecting telescopes. reflecting telescopes have different options for where the light is brought to a focus. with prime focus, light is detected where it comes to a focus after reflecting from the primary mirror. with newtonian focus, light is reflected by a small secondary mirror off to one side, where it can be detected (see also figure 6.5). most large professional telescopes have a cassegrain focus in which light is reflected by the secondary mirror down through a hole in the primary mirror to an observing station below the telescope. choosing your own telescope if the astronomy course you are taking whets your appetite for exploring the sky further, you may be thinking about buying your own telescope. many excellent amateur telescopes are available, and some research is required to find the best model for your needs. some good sources of information about personal telescopes are the two popular us magazines aimed at amateur astronomers: sky & telescope and astronomy. both carry regular articles with advice, reviews, and advertisements from reputable telescope dealers.
some of the factors that determine which telescope is right for you depend upon your preferences: • will you be setting up the telescope in one place and leaving it there, or do you want an instrument that is portable and can come with you on outdoor excursions? how portable should it be, in terms of size and weight? • do you want to observe the sky with your eyes only, or do you want to take photographs? (long- exposure photography, for example, requires a good clock drive to turn your telescope to compensate for earth’s rotation.) • what types of objects will you be observing? are you interested primarily in comets, planets, star clusters, or galaxies, or do you want to observe all kinds of celestial sights? you may not know the answers to some of these questions yet. for this reason, you may want to “test-drive” making connections 6.1 • telescopes 187 [image: astronomy_openstax_page205_img1.jpeg] some telescopes first. most communities have amateur astronomy clubs that sponsor star parties open to the public. the members of those clubs often know a lot about telescopes and can share their ideas with you.
your instructor may know where the nearest amateur astronomy club meets; or, to find a club near you, use the websites suggested in appendix b. furthermore, you may already have an instrument like a telescope at home (or have access to one through a relative or friend). many amateur astronomers recommend starting your survey of the sky with a good pair of binoculars. these are easily carried around and can show you many objects not visible (or clear) to the unaided eye. when you are ready to purchase a telescope, you might find the following ideas useful: • the key characteristic of a telescope is the aperture of the main mirror or lens; when someone says they have a 6-inch or 8-inch telescope, they mean the diameter of the collecting surface. the larger the aperture, the more light you can gather, and the fainter the objects you can see or photograph. • telescopes of a given aperture that use lenses (refractors) are typically more expensive than those using mirrors (reflectors) because both sides of a lens must be polished to great accuracy. and, because the light passes through it, the lens must be made of high-quality glass throughout. in contrast, only the front surface of a mirror must be accurately polished.
• magnification is not one of the criteria on which to base your choice of a telescope. as we discussed, the magnification of the image is done by a smaller eyepiece, so the magnification can be adjusted by changing eyepieces. however, a telescope will magnify not only the astronomical object you are viewing but also the turbulence of earth’s atmosphere. if the magnification is too high, your image will shimmer and shake and be difficult to view. a good telescope will come with a variety of eyepieces that stay within the range of useful magnification. • the mount of a telescope (the structure on which it rests) is one of its most critical elements. because a telescope shows a tiny field of view, which is magnified significantly, even the smallest vibration or jarring of the telescope can move the object you are viewing around or out of your field of view. a sturdy and stable mount is essential for serious viewing or photography (although it clearly affects how portable your telescope can be). • a telescope requires some practice to set up and use effectively. don’t expect everything to go perfectly on your first try. take some time to read the instructions. if a local amateur astronomy club is nearby, use it as a resource.