figure 29.17 cosmic background radiation. the solid line shows how the intensity of radiation should change with wavelength for a blackbody with a temperature of 2.73 k. the boxes show the intensity of the cosmic background radiation as measured at various wavelengths by cobe’s instruments. the fit is perfect. when this graph was first shown at a meeting of astronomers, they gave it a standing ovation. the first important conclusion from measurements of the cmb, therefore, is that the universe we have today has indeed evolved from a hot, uniform state. this observation also provides direct support for the general idea that we live in an evolving universe, since the universe is cooler today than it was in the beginning. small differences in the cmb it was known even before the launch of cobe that the cmb is extremely isotropic. in fact, its uniformity in every direction is one of the best confirmations of the cosmological principle— that the universe is homogenous and isotropic. according to our theories, however, the temperature could not have been perfectly uniform when the cmb was emitted. after all, the cmb is radiation that was scattered from the particles in the universe at the time of decoupling.
if the radiation were completely smooth, then all those particles must have been distributed through space absolutely evenly. yet it is those particles that have become all the galaxies and stars (and astronomy students) that now inhabit the cosmos. had the particles been completely smoothly distributed, they could not have formed all the large-scale structures now present in the universe—the clusters and superclusters of galaxies discussed in the last few chapters. the early universe must have had tiny density fluctuations from which such structures could evolve. regions of higher-than-average density would have attracted additional matter and eventually grown into the galaxies and clusters that we see today. it turns out that these denser regions would appear to us to be colder spots, that is, they would have lower-than-average temperatures. 1030 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1048_img1.jpeg] the reason that temperature and density are related can be explained this way. at the time of decoupling, photons in a slightly denser portion of space had to expend some of their energy to escape the gravitational force exerted by the surrounding gas. in losing energy, the photons became slightly colder than the overall average temperature at the time of decoupling.
vice versa, photons that were located in a slightly less dense portion of space lost less energy upon leaving it than other photons, thus appearing slightly hotter than average. therefore, if the seeds of present-day galaxies existed at the time that the cmb was emitted, we should see some slight variations in the cmb temperature as we look in different directions in the sky. scientists working with the data from the cobe satellite did indeed detect very subtle temperature differences—about 1 part in 100,000—in the cmb. the regions of lower-than-average temperature come in a variety of sizes, but even the smallest of the colder areas detected by cobe is far too large to be the precursor of an individual galaxy, or even a supercluster of galaxies. this is because the cobe instrument had “blurry vision” (poor resolution) and could only measure large patches of the sky. we needed instruments with “sharper vision.” the most detailed measurements of the cmb have been obtained by two satellites launched more recently than cobe. the results from the first of these satellites, the wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe (wmap) spacecraft, were published in 2003.
in 2015, measurements from the planck satellite extended the wmap measurements to even-higher spatial resolution and lower noise (figure 29.18). figure 29.18 cmb observations. this comparison shows how much detail can be seen in the observations of three satellites used to measure the cmb. the cmb is a snapshot of the oldest light in our universe, imprinted on the sky when the universe was just about 380,000 years old. the first spacecraft, launched in 1989, is nasa’s cosmic background explorer, or cobe. wmap was launched in 29.4 • the cosmic microwave background 1031 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1049_img1.jpeg] 2001, and planck was launched in 2009. the three panels show 10-square-degree patches of all-sky maps. this cosmic background radiation image (bottom) is an all-sky map of the cmb as observed by the planck mission. the colors in the map represent different temperatures: red for warmer and blue for cooler. these tiny temperature fluctuations correspond to regions of slightly different densities, representing the seeds of all future structures: the stars, galaxies, and galaxy clusters of today.