streaming out like a cosmic searchlight from the center of the galaxy, m87 is one of nature’s most amazing phenomena, a huge jet of electrons and other particles traveling at nearly the speed of light. in this hubble space telescope image, the blue of the jet contrasts with the yellow glow from the combined light of billions of unseen stars and yellow, point-like globular clusters that make up the galaxy (at the upper left). as we shall see later in this chapter, the jet, which is several thousand light-years long, originates in a disk of superheated gas swirling around a giant black hole at the center of m87. the light that we see is produced by electrons twisting along magnetic field lines in the jet, a process known as synchrotron radiation, which gives the jet its bluish tint. the jet in m87 can be observed in x-ray, radio, and visible light, as shown in the bottom three images. at the extreme left of each bottom image, we see the bright galactic nucleus harboring a supermassive black hole. (credit top: modification of work by nasa, the hubble heritage team(stsci/aura); credit bottom: modification of work by x-ray: h.
marshall (mit), et al., cxc, nasa; radio: f. zhou, f. owen (nrao), j. biretta (stsci); optical: e. perlman (umbc), et al.) after decades of study, astronomers identified many other strange objects beyond our milky way galaxy; they populate a whole “zoo” of what are now called active galaxies or active galactic nuclei (agn). astronomers first called them by many different names, depending on what sorts of observations discovered each category, but now we know that we are always looking at the same basic mechanism. what all these galaxies have in common is some activity in their nuclei that produces an enormous amount of energy in a very small volume of space. in the next section, we describe a model that explains all these galaxies with strong central activity—both the agns and the qsos. to see a jet for yourself, check out a time-lapse video (https://openstax.org/l/30timelapsejet) of the jet ejected from ngc 3862.
link to learning 934 27 • active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page952_img1.jpeg] 27.2 supermassive black holes: what quasars really are learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: in order to find a common model for quasars (and their cousins, the agns), let’s first list the common characteristics we have been describing—and add some new ones: • quasars are hugely powerful, emitting more power in radiated light than all the stars in our galaxy combined. • quasars are tiny, about the size of our solar system (to astronomers, that is really small!). • some quasars are observed to be shooting out pairs of straight jets at close to the speed of light, in a tight beam, to distances far beyond the galaxies they live in. these jets are themselves powerful sources of radio and gamma-ray radiation. • because quasars put out so much power from such a small region, they can’t be powered by nuclear fusion the way stars are; they must use some process that is far more efficient.
• as we shall see later in this chapter, quasars were much more common when the universe was young than they are today. that means they must have been able to form in the first billion years or so after the universe began to expand. the readers of this text are in a much better position than the astronomers who discovered quasars in the 1960s to guess what powers the quasars. that’s because the key idea in solving the puzzle came from observations of the black holes we discussed in black holes and curved spacetime. the discovery of the first stellar mass black hole in the binary system cygnus x-1 was announced in 1971, several years after the discovery of quasars. proof that there is a black hole at the center of our own galaxy came even later. back when astronomers first began trying to figure out what powered quasars, black holes were simply one of the more exotic predictions of the general theory of relativity that still waited to be connected to the real world. it was only as proof of the existence of black holes accumulated over several decades that it became clearer that only supermassive black holes could account for all the observed properties of quasars and agns.