sixty-five million years ago, our ancestors, the mammals, began to thrive when so many other species died out. we are the lucky beneficiaries of this process. impacts by comets and asteroids represent the only mechanisms we know of that could cause truly global catastrophes and seriously influence the evolution of life all over the planet. as paleontologist stephen jay gould of harvard noted, such a perspective changes fundamentally our view of biological evolution. the central issues for the survival of a species must now include more than just its success in competing with other species and adapting to slowly changing environments, as envisioned by darwin’s idea of natural selection. also required is an ability to survive random global catastrophes due to impacts. still earlier in its history, earth was subject to even larger impacts from the leftover debris of planet formation. we know that the moon was struck repeatedly by objects larger than 100 kilometers in diameter—1000 times more massive than the object that wiped out most terrestrial life 65 million years ago. earth must have experienced similar large impacts during its first 700 million years of existence. some of them were probably violent enough to strip the planet of most its atmosphere and to boil away its oceans.
such events would 280 8 • earth as a planet access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page298_img1.jpeg] sterilize the planet, destroying any life that had begun. life may have formed and been wiped out several times before our own microbial ancestors took hold sometime about 4 billion years ago. the fact that the oldest surviving microbes on earth are thermophiles (adapted to very high temperatures) can also be explained by such large impacts. an impact that was just a bit too small to sterilize the planet would still have destroyed anything that lived in what we consider “normal” environments, and only the creatures adapted to high temperatures would survive. thus, the oldest surviving terrestrial lifeforms are probably the remnants of a sort of evolutionary bottleneck caused by repeated large impacts early in the planet’s history. impacts in our future? the impacts by asteroids and comets that have had such a major influence on life are not necessarily a thing of the past. in the full scope of planetary history, 65 million years ago was just yesterday. earth actually orbits the sun within a sort of cosmic shooting gallery, and although major impacts are rare, they are by no means over.
humanity could suffer the same fate as the dinosaurs, or lose a city to the much more frequent impacts like the one over tunguska, unless we figure out a way to predict the next big impact and to protect our planet. the fact that our solar system is home to some very large planets in outer orbits may be beneficial to us; the gravitational fields of those planets can be very effective at pulling in cosmic debris and shielding us from larger, more frequent impacts. beginning in the 1990s, a few astronomers began to analyze the cosmic impact hazard and to persuade the government to support a search for potentially hazardous asteroids. several small but sophisticated wide-field telescopes are now used for this search, which is called the nasa spaceguard survey. already we know that there are currently no asteroids on a collision course with earth that are as big (10–15 kilometers) as the one that killed the dinosaurs. the spaceguard survey now concentrates on finding smaller potential impactors. by 2021, the search had netted more than 98 percent of the hazardous near-earth asteroids larger than 1 kilometer.
the spaceguard survey will soon be augmented by the vera rubin telescope that will scan the full sky on a regular basis, and an orbiting search telescope is under development by nasa. of course, we cannot make a similar statement about the asteroids that have not yet been discovered, but these will be found and evaluated one by one for their potential hazard. these asteroid surveys are one of the few really life-and-death projects carried out by astronomers, with a potential to help to save our planet from future major impacts. scientists are now studying how we could protect ourselves from an impact if a large asteroid were discovered on a collision course. the nasa spacecraft called dart (double asteroid redirection test), launched in late 2021, will demonstrate one example of such technology by crashing into the small asteroid diomorphos to slightly alter its orbit. the torino impact hazard scale (https://openstax.org/l/30torhazscale) is a method for categorizing the impact hazard associated with near-earth objects such as asteroids and comets. it is a communication tool for astronomers and the public to assess the seriousness of collision predictions by combining probability statistics and known kinetic damage potentials into a single threat value.
purdue university’s “impact: earth” calculator (https://openstax.org/l/30purimpearcal) lets you input the characteristics of an approaching asteroid to determine the effect of its impact on our planet.