516 15 • the sun: a garden-variety star access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page534_img1.jpeg] figure 15.8 temperatures in the solar atmosphere. on this graph, temperature is shown increasing upward, and height above the photosphere is shown increasing to the right. note the very rapid increase in temperature over a very short distance in the transition region between the chromosphere and the corona. in 2013, nasa launched the interface region imaging spectrograph (iris) to study the transition region to understand better how and why this sharp temperature increase occurs. iris is the first space mission that is able to obtain high spatial resolution images of the different features produced over this wide temperature range and to see how they change with time and location (figure 15.9). figure 15.9 portion of the transition region. this image shows a giant ribbon of relatively cool gas threading through the lower portion of the hot corona. this ribbon (the technical term is filament) is made up of many individual threads. time-lapse movies of this filament showed that it gradually heated as it moved through the corona.
scientists study events like this in order to try to understand what heats the chromosphere and corona to high temperatures. the “whiskers” at the edge of the sun are spicules, jets of gas that shoot material up from the sun’s surface and disappear after only a few minutes. this single image gives a hint of just how complicated it is to construct a model of the all the different structures and heating mechanisms in the solar atmosphere. (credit: jaxa/nasa/hinode) figure 15.4 and the red graph in figure 15.8 make the sun seem rather like an onion, with smooth spherical shells, each one with a different temperature. for a long time, astronomers did indeed think of the sun this 15.1 • the structure and composition of the sun 517 [image: astronomy_openstax_page535_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page535_img2.jpeg] way. however, we now know that while this idea of layers—photosphere, chromosphere, transition region, corona—describes the big picture fairly well, the sun’s atmosphere is really more complicated, with hot and cool regions intermixed.
for example, clouds of carbon monoxide gas with temperatures colder than 4000 k have now been found at the same height above the photosphere as the much hotter gas of the chromosphere. the corona the outermost part of the sun’s atmosphere is called the corona. like the chromosphere, the corona was first observed during total eclipses (figure 15.10). unlike the chromosphere, the corona has been known for many centuries: it was referred to by the roman historian plutarch and was discussed in some detail by kepler. the corona extends millions of kilometers above the photosphere and emits about half as much light as the full moon. the reason we don’t see this light until an eclipse occurs is the overpowering brilliance of the photosphere. just as bright city lights make it difficult to see faint starlight, so too does the intense light from the photosphere hide the faint light from the corona. while the best time to see the corona from earth is during a total solar eclipse, it can be observed easily from orbiting spacecraft.
its brighter parts can now be photographed with a special instrument—a coronagraph—that removes the sun’s glare from the image with an occulting disk (a circular piece of material held so it is just in front of the sun). figure 15.10 coronagraph. this image of the sun was taken march 2, 2016. the larger dark circle in the center is the disk the blocks the sun’s glare, allowing us to see the corona. the smaller inner circle is where the sun would be if it were visible in this image. (credit: modification of work by nasa/soho) studies of its spectrum show the corona to be very low in density. at the bottom of the corona, there are only about 109 atoms per cubic centimeter, compared with about 1016 atoms per cubic centimeter in the upper photosphere and 1019 molecules per cubic centimeter at sea level in earth’s atmosphere. the corona thins out very rapidly at greater heights, where it corresponds to a high vacuum by earth laboratory standards.