rarely, there would be a jump from one plate to the other, but this was always due to an asteroid. most of the asteroids he observed were known, but over the course of about two years he discovered 15 new asteroids. but things changed on february 18, 1930, when he was comparing plates taken on january 23rd and january 29th. there was an ordinary-looking star-like object that jumped, but a much smaller distance than was usual for fast-moving asteroids. subsequent observations confirmed what he had hoped, and an orbit was calculated for the new object. the announcement of the discovery of a new planet, later designated as pluto, was made on march 13, 1930, percival lowell’s birthday. hubble may have increased the size of the universe, but clyde tombaugh had increased the size of the solar system. how the universe began: big bang vs. steady state the astronomical revolution that occurred between 1915 and 1930 left one fundamental question untouched: how did it all begin? this is an age-old question going back to the beginning of history. many guesses both mythological and scientific have been advanced over the centuries, without resolution.
with the new telescopes and advanced theories, was it possible to find an answer that would meet scientific scrutiny? the results of relativity theory and of hubble’s observations strongly suggested that the universe is currently expanding. so if it is expanding now, in the past it must have been smaller than it is today. if you go back far enough, there must have been a moment of creation from nothing. but some scientists and philosophers rejected this as impossible on grounds that science does not recognize creation ex nihilo, that is, for every material effect there must be a material cause. several decades passed without conclusive evidence one way or another. one critic of the idea of a single moment of creation for the entire universe, astronomer fred hoyle [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page471_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 472 figure 512: radar antenna photo by nrao (1915-2001), derisively said during a popular radio broadcast in 1949 that it was as if the universe had been created in a “big bang.” the term stuck.
the steady state theory was propounded by physicists herman bondi (1919-2005), thomas gold (1920-2004), and fred hoyle (1915-2001) in a series of scientific papers beginning in 1948. at the heart of the theory was what has become known as the perfect cosmological principle, which states that at the largest scales the universe is essentially the same at any time and in any direction (homogeneous and isotropic). the big bang theory employs a more restricted principle stating that in the past the universe was fundamentally different than it is now and how it will be in the future. steady state theory asserts that the universe is essentially always the same: the universe is eternal. bondi, gold, and hoyle did not dispute hubble’s findings that the universe is expanding. to maintain homogeneity, therefore, they posited the spontaneous creation of matter between individual galaxies so that the average density of the universe would always remain a constant. they computed that it would only take one new atom per cubic meter per billion years. critics immediately attacked this idea of spontaneous creation as absurd and unscientific.
but they retorted in kind: it was no more absurd or unscientific than having the entire universe suddenly explode into existence out of nothing. what was needed was hard data to resolve the issue. beginning in the late 1950’s astronomers began to produce observations from all-sky surveys that seemed to support the big bang. the post-world war ii era witnessed the advent of radio-astronomy and its expansion into the microwave region of the electromagnetic spectrum, largely due to wartime experience with radar (bondi, gold, and hoyle all worked on radar for great britain during the war). by 1963, the 200-inch telescope at mt. palomar and other observatories began to detect in visible light what the radio-telescopes were finding, namely “quasi-stellar objects” that were very small for the huge amounts of energy they were radiating. observing objects like 3c 48 and 3c 273 in visible light meant that they’re spectra could be imaged, and very large red-shifts were measured.