to see how this allows us to measure diameters, look carefully at figure 18.11. during the time interval between the first and second contacts, the smaller star has moved a distance equal to its own diameter. during the time interval from the first to third contacts, the smaller star has moved a distance equal to the diameter of the larger star. if the spectral lines of both stars are visible in the spectrum of the binary, then the speed of the smaller star with respect to the larger one can be measured from the doppler shift. but knowing the speed with which the smaller star is moving and how long it took to cover some distance can tell the span of that distance—in this case, the diameters of the stars. the speed multiplied by the time interval from the first to second contact gives the diameter of the smaller star. we multiply the speed by the time between the first and third contacts to get the diameter of the larger star. figure 18.11 light curve of an edge-on eclipsing binary. here we see the light curve of a hypothetical eclipsing binary star whose orbit we view exactly edge-on, in which the two stars fully eclipse each other. from the time intervals between contacts, it is possible to estimate the diameters of the two stars.
in actuality, the situation with eclipsing binaries is often a bit more complicated: orbits are generally not seen exactly edge-on, and the light from each star may be only partially blocked by the other. furthermore, binary star orbits, just like the orbits of the planets, are ellipses, not circles. however, all these effects can be sorted 18.3 • diameters of stars 617 [image: astronomy_openstax_page635_img1.jpeg] out from very careful measurements of the light curve. the eclipsing binary simulator (https://openstax.org/l/30eclipsbinsim) allows you to explore how the eclipse timing can be used to determine the size of stars in a binary pair. other traits can be explored as well, such as their mass, separation, and surface temperatures. using the radiation law to get the diameter another method for measuring star diameters makes use of the stefan-boltzmann law for the relationship between energy radiated and temperature (see radiation and spectra). in this method, the energy flux (energy emitted per second per square meter by a blackbody, like the sun) is given by where σ is a constant and t is the temperature.
the surface area of a sphere (like a star) is given by the luminosity (l) of a star is then given by its surface area in square meters times the energy flux: previously, we determined the masses of the two stars in the sirius binary system. sirius gives off 8200 times more energy than its fainter companion star, although both stars have nearly identical temperatures. the extremely large difference in luminosity is due to the difference in radius, since the temperatures and hence the energy fluxes for the two stars are nearly the same. to determine the relative sizes of the two stars, we take the ratio of the corresponding luminosities: therefore, the relative sizes of the two stars can be found by taking the square root of the relative luminosity. since , the radius of sirius is 91 times larger than the radius of its faint companion. the method for determining the radius shown here requires both stars be visible, which is not always the case. use the stellar luminosity simulator (https://openstax.org/l/30stellumsim) to explore the relationship between a star’s surface temperature, luminosity, and radius. move the sliders to see what happens.
try to make two stars with the same luminosity but different surface temperatures. link to learning link to learning 618 18 • the stars: a celestial census access for free at openstax.org stellar diameters the results of many stellar size measurements over the years have shown that most nearby stars are roughly the size of the sun, with typical diameters of a million kilometers or so. faint stars, as we might have expected, are generally smaller than more luminous stars. however, there are some dramatic exceptions to this simple generalization. a few of the very luminous stars, those that are also red (indicating relatively low surface temperatures), turn out to be truly enormous. these stars are called, appropriately enough, giant stars or supergiant stars. an example is betelgeuse (see figure 22.4), the second brightest star in the constellation of orion and one of the dozen brightest stars in our sky. its diameter, remarkably, is greater than 10 au (1.5 billion kilometers!), large enough to fill the entire inner solar system almost as far out as jupiter. in stars from adolescence to old age, we will look in detail at the evolutionary process that leads to the formation of such giant and supergiant stars.