examples of agn in the nearby universe today include the one in galaxy m87 (see figure 27.7), which sports a jet of material shooting out from its nucleus at speeds close to the speed of light, and the one in the bright galaxy ngc 5128, also known as centaurus a (see figure 28.12). 28.2 • galaxy mergers and active galactic nuclei 969 [image: astronomy_openstax_page987_img1.jpeg] figure 28.12 composite view of the galaxy centaurus a. this artificially colored image was made using data from three different telescopes: submillimeter radiation with a wavelength of 870 microns is shown in orange; x-rays are seen in blue; and visible light from stars is shown in its natural color. centaurus a has an active galactic nucleus that is powering two jets, seen in blue and orange, reaching in opposite directions far outside the galaxy’s stellar disk, and inflating two huge lobes, or clouds, of hot x-ray-emitting gas. centaurus is at a distance of 13 million light-years, making it one of the closest active galaxies we know.
(credit: modification of work by eso/wfi (optical); mpifr/eso/apex/a. weiss et al. (submillimeter); nasa/cxc/cfa/r.kraft et al. (x-ray)) many highly accelerated particles move with the jets in such galaxies. along the way, the particles in the jets can plow into gas clouds in the interstellar medium, breaking them apart and scattering them. since denser clouds of gas and dust are required for material to clump together to make stars, the disruption of the clouds can halt star formation in the host galaxy or cut it off before it even begins. in this way, quasars and other kinds of agn can play a crucial role in the evolution of their galaxies. for example, there is growing evidence that the merger of two gas-rich galaxies not only produces a huge burst of star formation, but also triggers agn activity in the core of the new galaxy. that activity, in turn, could then slow down or shut off the burst of star formation—which could have significant implications for the apparent shape, brightness, chemical content, and stellar components of the entire galaxy.
astronomers refer to that process as agn feedback, and it is apparently an important factor in the evolution of most galaxies. 28.3 the distribution of galaxies in space learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: in the preceding section, we emphasized the role of mergers in shaping the evolution of galaxies. in order to collide, galaxies must be fairly close together. to estimate how often collisions occur and how they affect galaxy evolution, astronomers need to know how galaxies are distributed in space and over cosmic time. are most of them isolated from one another or do they congregate in groups? if they congregate, how large are the groups and how and when did they form? and how, in general, are galaxies and their groups arranged in the cosmos? are there as many in one direction of the sky as in any other, for example? how did galaxies get to be arranged the way we find them today?
explain the cosmological principle and summarize the evidence that it applies on the largest scales of the known universe describe the contents of the local group of galaxies distinguish among groups, clusters, and superclusters of galaxies describe the largest structures seen in the universe, including voids 970 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page988_img1.jpeg] edwin hubble found answers to some of these questions only a few years after he first showed that the spiral nebulae were galaxies and not part of our milky way. as he examined galaxies all over the sky, hubble made two discoveries that turned out to be crucial for studies of the evolution of the universe. the cosmological principle hubble made his observations with what were then the world’s largest telescopes—the 100-inch and 60-inch reflectors on mount wilson. these telescopes have small fields of view: they can see only a small part of the heavens at a time. to photograph the entire sky with the 100-inch telescope, for example, would have taken longer than a human lifetime.