(b) the moon of the milky way by japanese painter tsukioka yoshitoshi depicts the chinese legend of zhi nu and niu lang. to the quechua indians of andean peru, the milky way was seen as the celestial abode for all sorts of cosmic creatures. arrayed along the milky way are myriad dark patches that they identified with partridges, llamas, a toad, a snake, a fox, and other animals. the quechua’s orientation toward the dark regions rather than the glowing band of starlight appears to be unique among all the myth makers. likely, their access to the richly structured southern milky way had something to do with it. among finns, estonians, and related northern european cultures, the milky way is regarded as the “pathway of birds” across the night sky. having noted that birds seasonally migrate along a north-south route, they identified this byway with the milky way. recent scientific studies have shown that this myth is rooted in fact: the birds of this region use the milky way as a guide for their annual migrations.
today, we regard the milky way as our galactic abode, where the foment of star birth and star death plays out on a grand stage, and where sundry planets have been found to be orbiting all sorts of stars. although our perspective on the milky way is based on scientific investigations, we share with our forebears an affinity for telling stories of origin and transformation. in these regards, the milky way continues to fascinate and inspire us. 25.2 spiral structure learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: astronomers were able to make tremendous progress in mapping the spiral structure of the milky way after the discovery of the 21-cm line that comes from cool hydrogen (see between the stars: gas and dust in space). remember that the obscuring effect of interstellar dust prevents us from seeing stars at large distances in the describe the structure of the milky way galaxy and how astronomers discovered it compare theoretical models for the formation of spiral arms in disk galaxies 870 25 • the milky way galaxy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page888_img1.jpeg] disk at visible wavelengths.
however, radio waves of 21-cm wavelength pass right through the dust, enabling astronomers to detect hydrogen atoms throughout the galaxy. more recent surveys of the infrared emission from stars in the disk have provided a similar dust-free perspective of our galaxy’s stellar distribution. despite all this progress over the past fifty years, we are still just beginning to pin down the precise structure of our galaxy. the arms of the milky way our radio observations of the disk’s gaseous component indicate that the galaxy has two major spiral arms that emerge from the bar and several fainter arms and shorter spurs. you can see a recently assembled map of our galaxy’s arm structure—derived from studies in the infrared—in figure 25.10. figure 25.10 milky way bar and arms. here, we see the milky way galaxy as it would look from above. this image, assembled from data from nasa’s spitzer mission, shows that the milky way galaxy has a modest bar in its central regions. two spiral arms, scutum- centaurus and perseus, emerge from the ends of the bar and wrap around the bulge. the sagittarius and outer arms have fewer stars than the other two arms.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/r. hurt (ssc/caltech)) the sun is near the inner edge of a short arm (or spur) called the orion-cygnus arm, which is about 10,000 light-years long and contains such conspicuous features as the cygnus rift (the great dark nebula in the summer milky way) and the bright orion nebula. figure 25.11 shows a few other objects that share this small section of the galaxy with us and are easy to see. remember, the farther away we try to look from our own 25.2 • spiral structure 871 [image: astronomy_openstax_page889_img1.jpeg] arm, the more the dust in the galaxy builds up and makes it hard to see with visible light. figure 25.11 orion spur. the sun is located in the orion spur (also called the orion-cygnus arm), which is a minor spiral arm located between two other arms. in this diagram, the white lines point to some other noteworthy objects that share this feature of the milky way galaxy with the sun.