dutch astronomers had built an instrument to detect the 21-cm waves that they had predicted, but a fire destroyed it. as a result, two harvard physicists, harold ewen and edward purcell, made the first detection (figure 20.6), soon followed by confirmations from the dutch and a group in australia. since the detection of the 21-cm line, many other radio lines produced by both atoms and molecules have been discovered (as we will discuss in a moment), and these have allowed astronomers to map out the neutral gas throughout our home galaxy. astronomers have also detected neutral interstellar gas, including hydrogen, at many other wavelengths from the infrared to the ultraviolet. 674 20 • between the stars: gas and dust in space access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page692_img1.jpeg] figure 20.6 harold ewen (1922–2015) and edward purcell (1912–1997). we see harold ewen in 1952 working with the horn antenna (atop the physics laboratory at harvard) that made the first detection of interstellar 21-cm radiation.
the inset shows edward purcell, the winner of the 1952 nobel prize in physics, a few years later. (credit: modification of work by nrao) modern radio observations show that most of the neutral hydrogen in our galaxy is confined to an extremely flat layer, less than 300 light-years thick, that extends throughout the disk of the milky way galaxy. this gas has densities ranging from about 0.1 to about 100 atoms per cm3, and it exists at a wide range of temperatures, from as low as about 100 k (–173 °c) to as high as about 8000 k. these regions of warm and cold gas are interspersed with each other, and the density and temperature at any particular point in space are constantly changing. ultra-hot interstellar gas while the temperatures of 10,000 k found in h ii regions might seem warm, they are not the hottest phase of the interstellar medium. some of the interstellar gas is at a temperature of a million degrees, even though there is no visible source of heat nearby. the discovery of this ultra-hot interstellar gas was a big surprise.
before the launch of astronomical observatories into space, which could see radiation in the ultraviolet and x- ray parts of the spectrum, astronomers assumed that most of the region between stars was filled with hydrogen at temperatures no warmer than those found in h ii regions. but telescopes launched above earth’s atmosphere obtained ultraviolet spectra that contained interstellar lines produced by oxygen atoms that have been ionized five times. to strip five electrons from their orbits around an oxygen nucleus requires a lot of energy. subsequent observations with orbiting x-ray telescopes revealed that the galaxy is filled with numerous bubbles of x-ray-emitting gas. to emit x-rays, and to contain oxygen atoms that have been ionized five times, gas must be heated to temperatures of a million degrees or more. theorists have now shown that the source of energy producing these remarkable temperatures is the explosion of massive stars at the ends of their lives (figure 20.7). such explosions, called supernovae, will be discussed in detail in the chapter on the death of stars. for now, we’ll just say that some stars, nearing the ends of their lives, become unstable and literally explode.
these explosions launch gas into interstellar space at velocities of tens of thousands of kilometers per second (up to about 30% the speed of light). when this ejected gas collides with interstellar gas, it produces shocks that heat the gas to millions or tens of millions of degrees. 20.2 • interstellar gas 675 [image: astronomy_openstax_page693_img1.jpeg] figure 20.7 vela supernova remnant. about 11,000 years ago, a dying star in the constellation of vela exploded, becoming as bright as the full moon in earth’s skies. you can see the faint rounded filaments from that explosion in the center of this colorful image. the edges of the remnant are colliding with the interstellar medium, heating the gas they plow through to temperatures of millions of k. telescopes in space also reveal a glowing sphere of x-ray radiation from the remnant. (credit: digitized sky survey, esa/ eso/nasa fits liberator, davide de martin) astronomers estimate that one supernova explodes roughly every 100 years somewhere in the galaxy. on average, shocks launched by supernovae sweep through any given point in the galaxy about once every few million years.