the local group is part of a supercluster we call the virgo supercluster because it also includes the giant virgo cluster of galaxies. the superclusters resemble an irregularly torn sheet of paper or a pancake in shape—they can extend for hundreds of millions of light-years in two dimensions, but are only 10 to 20 million light-years thick in the third dimension. detailed study of some of these structures shows that their masses are a few times 1016 msun, which is 10,000 times more massive than the milky way galaxy. check out this animated visualization (https://openstax.org/l/30anivisslosur) of large-scale structure from the sloan survey. figure 28.21 sloan digital sky survey map of the large-scale structure of the universe. this image shows slices from the sdss map. the point at the center corresponds to the milky way and might say “you are here!” points on the map moving outward from the center are farther away. the distance to the galaxies is indicated by their redshifts (following hubble’s law), shown on the horizontal line going right from the center.
the redshift z = δλ/λ, where δλ is the difference between the observed wavelength and the wavelength λ emitted by a nonmoving source in the laboratory. hour angle on the sky is shown around the circumference of the circular graph. the colors of the galaxies indicate the ages of their stars, with the redder color showing galaxies that are made of older stars. the outer circle is at a distance of two billion light-years from us. note that red (older stars) galaxies are more strongly clustered than blue galaxies (young stars). the unmapped areas are where our view of the universe is obstructed by dust in our own galaxy. (credit: modification of work by m. blanton and the sloan digital sky survey) separating the filaments and sheets in a supercluster are voids, which look like huge empty bubbles walled in by the great arcs of galaxies. they have typical diameters of 150 million light-years, with the clusters of galaxies concentrated along their walls. the whole arrangement of filaments and voids reminds us of a sponge, the inside of a honeycomb, or a hunk of swiss cheese with very large holes.
if you take a good slice or cross-section through any of these, you will see something that looks roughly like figure 28.21. before these voids were discovered, most astronomers would probably have predicted that the regions between giant clusters of galaxies were filled with many small groups of galaxies, or even with isolated individual galaxies. careful searches within these voids have found few galaxies of any kind. apparently, 90 percent of the galaxies occupy less than 10 percent of the volume of space. link to learning 980 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page998_img1.jpeg] e x a m p l e 2 8 . 1 galaxy distribution to determine the distribution of galaxies in three-dimensional space, astronomers have to measure their positions and their redshifts. the larger the volume of space surveyed, the more likely the measurement is a fair sample of the universe as a whole. however, the work involved increases very rapidly as you increase the volume covered by the survey. let’s do a quick calculation to see why this is so.
suppose that you have completed a survey of all the galaxies within 30 million light-years and you now want to survey to 60 million light-years. what volume of space is covered by your second survey? how much larger is this volume than the volume of your first survey? remember that the volume of a sphere, v, is given by the formula v = 4/3πr3, where r is the radius of the sphere. solution since the volume of a sphere depends on r3 and the second survey reaches twice as far in distance, it will cover a volume that is times larger. the total volume covered by the second survey will be . check your learning suppose you now want to expand your survey to 90 million light-years. what volume of space is covered, and how much larger is it than the volume of the second survey? answer: the total volume covered is . the survey reaches 3 times as far in distance, so it will cover a volume that is times larger. in the past few years, even larger, more sensitive telescopes have begun operation. the 6.5-meter james webb space telescope (jwst) was launched in late 2021 and is now in regular operation.