because they are not very large and, therefore, have a shorter wavelength, a good number of the ponies can move past you each minute; we can say they have a high frequency. next, however, come several rows of circus elephants. the elephants are large and marching at the same speed as the ponies, so far fewer of them can march past you per minute: because they have a wider spacing (longer wavelength), they represent a lower frequency. the formula for this relationship can be expressed as follows: for any wave motion, the speed at which a wave moves equals the frequency times the wavelength. waves with longer wavelengths have lower frequencies. mathematically, we can express this as where the greek letter for “l”—lambda, λ—is used to denote wavelength and c is the scientific symbol for the speed of light. solving for the wavelength, this is expressed as: ue u e ue ue ue ue ue 5.1 • the behavior of light 145 [image: astronomy_openstax_page163_img1.jpeg] e x a m p l e 5 . 1 deriving and using the wave equation the equation for the relationship between the speed and other characteristics of a wave can be derived from our basic understanding of motion.
the average speed of anything that is moving is: (so, for example, a car on the highway traveling at a speed of 100 km/h covers 100 km during the time of 1 h.) for an electromagnetic wave to travel the distance of one of its wavelengths, λ, at the speed of light, c, we have . the frequency of a wave is the number of cycles per second. if a wave has a frequency of a million cycles per second, then the time for each cycle to go by is a millionth of a second. so, in general, . substituting into our wave equation, we get . now let’s use this to calculate an example. what is the wavelength of visible light that has a frequency of ? solution solving the wave equation for wavelength, we find: substituting our values gives: this answer can also be written as 530 nm, which is in the yellow-green part of the visible spectrum (nm stands for nanometers, where the term “nano” means “billionths”). check your learning “tidal waves,” or tsunamis, are waves caused by earthquakes that travel rapidly through the ocean.
if a tsunami travels at the speed of 600 km/h and approaches a shore at a rate of one wave crest every 15 min (4 waves/h), what would be the distance between those wave crests at sea? answer: light as a photon the electromagnetic wave model of light (as formulated by maxwell) was one of the great triumphs of nineteenth-century science. in 1887, when heinrich hertz actually made invisible electromagnetic waves (what today are called radio waves) on one side of a room and detected them on the other side, it ushered in a new era that led to the modern age of telecommunications. his experiment ultimately led to the technologies of television, cell phones, and today’s wireless networks around the globe. however, by the beginning of the twentieth century, more sophisticated experiments had revealed that light behaves in certain ways that cannot be explained by the wave model. reluctantly, physicists had to accept that sometimes light behaves more like a “particle”—or at least a self-contained packet of energy—than a wave. we call such a packet of electromagnetic energy a photon.
146 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org the fact that light behaves like a wave in certain experiments and like a particle in others was a very surprising and unlikely idea. after all, our common sense says that waves and particles are opposite concepts. on one hand, a wave is a repeating disturbance that, by its very nature, is not in only one place, but spreads out. a particle, on the other hand, is something that can be in only one place at any given time. strange as it sounds, though, countless experiments now confirm that electromagnetic radiation can sometimes behave like a wave and at other times like a particle. then, again, perhaps we shouldn’t be surprised that something that always travels at the “speed limit” of the universe and doesn’t need a medium to travel through might not obey our everyday common sense ideas. the confusion that this wave-particle duality of light caused in physics was eventually resolved by the introduction of a more complicated theory of waves and particles, now called quantum mechanics. (this is one of the most interesting fields of modern science, but it is mostly beyond the scope of our book.