some are much brighter and hotter (bluer), while others are significantly dimmer and cooler (redder), and the distance of the habitable zone varies accordingly. for example, the habitable zone around m- dwarf stars is 3 to 30 times closer in than for g-type (sun-like) stars. there is a lot of interest in whether such systems could be habitable because—although they have some potential downsides for supporting life—m- dwarf stars are by far the most numerous and long-lived in our galaxy. the luminosity of stars like the sun also increases over their main-sequence lifetime, and this means that the habitable zone migrates outward as a star system ages. calculations indicate that the power output of the sun, for example, has increased by at least 30% over the past 4 billion years. thus, venus was once within the habitable zone, while earth received a level of solar energy insufficient to keep the modern earth (with its present atmosphere) from freezing over. in spite of this, there is plenty of geological evidence that liquid water was present on earth’s surface billions of years ago.
the phenomenon of increasing stellar output and an outwardly migrating habitable zone has led to another concept: the continuously habitable zone is defined by the range of orbits that would remain within the habitable zone during the entire lifetime of the star system. as you might imagine, the continuously habitable zone is quite a bit narrower than the habitable zone is at any 1 the amount of starlight received per unit area of a planet’s surface (per square meter, for example) decreases with the square of the distance from the star. thus, when the orbital distance doubles, the illumination decreases by 4 times (22), and when the orbital distance increases tenfold, the illumination decreases by 100 times (102). venus and mars orbit the sun at about 72% and 152% of earth’s orbital distance, respectively, so venus receives about 1/(0.72)2 = 1.92 (about twice) and mars about 1/(1.52)2 = 0.43 (about half) as much light per square meter of planet surface as earth does. 1072 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org one time in a star’s history.
the nearest star to the sun, proxima centauri, is an m star that has a planet with a mass of at least 1.3 earth masses, taking about 11 days to orbit. at the distance for such a quick orbit (0.05 au), the planet may be in the habitable zone of its star, although whether conditions on such a planet near such a star are hospitable for life is a matter of great scientific debate. even when planets orbit within the habitable zone of their star, it is no guarantee that they are habitable. for example, venus today has virtually no water, so even if it were suddenly moved to a “just right” orbit within the habitable zone, a critical requirement for life would still be lacking. scientists are working to understand all the factors that define the habitable zone and the habitability of planets orbiting within that zone because this will be our primary guide in targeting exoplanets on which to seek evidence of life. as technology for detecting exoplanets has advanced, so too has our potential to find earth-size worlds within the habitable zones of their parent stars.
of the confirmed or candidate exoplanets known at the time of writing, nearly 300 are considered to be orbiting within the habitable zone and more than 10% of those are roughly earth-size. explore the habitable world catalog (https://openstax.org/l/30planhabitlab) at the online planetary habitability laboratory at the university of puerto rico. see the potentially habitable exoplanets that are thought to be most likely to permit life as we know it to develop. explore how the size and distance of the habitable zone (https://openstax.org/l/30planethunt) varies for stars of different masses. you can also explore how the location of its habitable zone changes (https://openstax.org/l/30ccnmtl) over the lifespan of a star, as it goes from one stage of its life to another. biomarkers our observations suggest increasingly that earth-size planets orbiting within the habitable zone may be common in the galaxy—current estimates suggest that more than 40% of stars have at least one. but are any of them inhabited?