it was still too hot for electrons to “settle down” and become associated with a particular nucleus; such free electrons are especially effective at scattering photons, thus ensuring that no radiation ever got very far in the early universe without having its path changed. in a way, the universe was like an enormous crowd right after a popular concert; if you get separated from a friend, even if he is wearing a flashing button, it is impossible to see through the dense crowd to spot him. only after the crowd clears is there a path for the light from his button to reach you. the universe becomes transparent not until a few hundred thousand years after the big bang, when the temperature had dropped to about 3000 k and the density of atomic nuclei to about 1000 per cubic centimeter, did the electrons and nuclei manage to combine to form stable atoms of hydrogen and helium (figure 29.14). with no free electrons to scatter photons, the universe became transparent for the first time in cosmic history. from this point on, matter and radiation interacted much less frequently; we say that they decoupled from each other and evolved separately. suddenly, electromagnetic radiation could really travel, and it has been traveling through the universe ever since.
discovery of the cosmic background radiation if the model of the universe described in the previous section is correct, then—as we look far outward in the universe and thus far back in time—the first “afterglow” of the hot, early universe should still be detectable. observations of it would be very strong evidence that our theoretical calculations about how the universe evolved are correct. as we shall see, we have indeed detected the radiation emitted at this photon decoupling time, when radiation began to stream freely through the universe without interacting with matter (figure 29.15). explain why we can observe the afterglow of the hot, early universe discuss the properties of this afterglow as we see it today, including its average temperature and the size of its temperature fluctuations describe open, flat, and curved universes and explain which type of universe is supported by observations summarize our current knowledge of the basic properties of the universe including its age and contents 29.4 • the cosmic microwave background 1027 figure 29.15 cosmic microwave background and clouds compared. (a) early in the universe, photons (electromagnetic energy) were scattering off the crowded, hot, charged particles and could not get very far without colliding with another particle.
but after electrons and photons settled into neutral atoms, there was far less scattering, and photons could travel over vast distances. the universe became transparent. as we look out in space and back in time, we can’t see back beyond this time. (b) this is similar to what happens when we see clouds in earth’s atmosphere. water droplets in a cloud scatter light very efficiently, but clear air lets light travel over long distances. so as we look up into the atmosphere, our vision is blocked by the cloud layers and we can’t see beyond them. (credit: modification of work by nasa) the detection of this afterglow was initially an accident. in the late 1940s, ralph alpher and robert herman, working with george gamow, realized that just before the universe became transparent, it must have been radiating like a blackbody at a temperature of about 3000 k—the temperature at which hydrogen atoms could begin to form. if we could have seen that radiation just after neutral atoms formed, it would have resembled radiation from a reddish star. it was as if a giant fireball filled the whole universe.
but that was nearly 14 billion years ago, and, in the meantime, the scale of the universe has increased a thousand fold. this expansion has increased the wavelength of the radiation by a factor of 1000 (see figure 29.7). according to wien’s law, which relates wavelength and temperature, the expansion has correspondingly lowered the temperature by a factor of 1000 (see the chapter on radiation and spectra). the cosmic background behaves like a blackbody and should therefore have a spectrum that obeys wien’s law. alpher and herman predicted that the glow from the fireball should now be at radio wavelengths and should resemble the radiation from a blackbody at a temperature only a few degrees above absolute zero. since the fireball was everywhere throughout the universe, the radiation left over from it should also be everywhere. if our eyes were sensitive to radio wavelengths, the whole sky would appear to glow very faintly. however, our eyes can’t see at these wavelengths, and at the time alpher and herman made their prediction, there were no instruments that could detect the glow. over the years, their prediction was forgotten.