(b) we view this spiral galaxy, ngc 4565, almost exactly edge on, and from this angle, we can see the dust in the plane of the galaxy; it appears dark because it absorbs the light from the stars in the galaxy. (credit a: modification of work by hubble legacy archive, nasa, esa, and judy schmidt; credit b: modification of work by “jschulman555”/ wikimedia) in galaxies that we see face on, the bright stars and emission nebulae make the arms of spirals stand out like those of a pinwheel on the fourth of july. open star clusters can be seen in the arms of nearer spirals, and globular clusters are often visible in their halos. spiral galaxies contain a mixture of young and old stars, just as the milky way does. all spirals rotate, and the direction of their spin is such that the arms appear to trail much like the wake of a boat.
describe the properties and features of elliptical, spiral, and irregular galaxies explain what may cause a galaxy’s appearance to change over time 26.2 • types of galaxies 901 [image: astronomy_openstax_page919_img1.jpeg] about two-thirds of the nearby spiral galaxies have boxy or peanut-shaped bars of stars running through their centers (figure 26.5). showing great originality, astronomers call these galaxies barred spirals. figure 26.5 barred spiral galaxy. ngc 1300, shown here, is a barred spiral galaxy. note that the spiral arms begin at the ends of the bar. (credit: nasa, esa, and the hubble heritage team(stsci/aura)) as we noted in the milky way galaxy chapter, our galaxy has a modest bar too (see figure 25.10). the spiral arms usually begin from the ends of the bar. the fact that bars are so common suggests that they are long lived; it may be that most spiral galaxies form a bar at some point during their evolution. in both barred and unbarred spiral galaxies, we observe a range of different shapes.
at one extreme, the central bulge is large and luminous, the arms are faint and tightly coiled, and bright emission nebulae and supergiant stars are inconspicuous. hubble, who developed a system of classifying galaxies by shape, gave these galaxies the designation sa. galaxies at this extreme may have no clear spiral arm structure, resulting in a lens-like appearance (they are sometimes referred to as lenticular galaxies). these galaxies seem to share as many properties with elliptical galaxies as they do with spiral galaxies at the other extreme, the central bulge is small and the arms are loosely wound. in these sc galaxies, luminous stars and emission nebulae are very prominent. our galaxy and the andromeda galaxy are both intermediate between the two extremes. photographs of spiral galaxies, illustrating the different types, are shown in figure 26.6, along with elliptical galaxies for comparison. 902 26 • galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page920_img1.jpeg] figure 26.6 hubble classification of galaxies. this figure shows edwin hubble’s original classification of galaxies. elliptical galaxies are on the left.
on the right, you can see the basic spiral shapes illustrated, alongside images of actual barred and unbarred spirals. (credit: modification of work by nasa, esa) the luminous parts of spiral galaxies appear to range in diameter from about 20,000 to more than 100,000 light-years. recent studies have found that there is probably a large amount of galactic material that extends well beyond the apparent edge of galaxies. this material appears to be thin, cold gas that is difficult to detect in most observations. from the observational data available, the masses of the visible portions of spiral galaxies are estimated to range from 1 billion to 1 trillion suns (109 to 1012 msun). the total luminosities of most spirals fall in the range of 100 million to 100 billion times the luminosity of our sun (108 to 1011 lsun). our galaxy and m31 are relatively large and massive, as spirals go. there is also considerable dark matter in and around the galaxies, just as there is in the milky way; we deduce its presence from how fast stars in the outer parts of the galaxy are moving in their orbits.