the first fairly accurate determination of earth’s diameter was made in about 200 bce by eratosthenes (276–194 bce), a greek living in alexandria, egypt. his method was a geometric one, based on observations of the sun. the sun is so distant from us that all the light rays that strike our planet approach us along essentially parallel lines. to see why, look at figure 2.10. take a source of light near earth—say, at position a. its rays strike different parts of earth along diverging paths. from a light source at b, or at c (which is still farther away), the angle between rays that strike opposite parts of earth is smaller. the more distant the source, the smaller the angle between the rays. for a source infinitely distant, the rays travel along parallel lines. figure 2.10 light rays from space. the more distant an object, the more nearly parallel the rays of light coming from it. of course, the sun is not infinitely far away, but given its distance of 150 million kilometers, light rays striking earth from a point on the sun diverge from one another by an angle far too small to be observed with the unaided eye.
as a consequence, if people all over earth who could see the sun were to point at it, their fingers would, essentially, all be parallel to one another. (the same is also true for the planets and stars—an idea we will use in our discussion of how telescopes work.) astronomy basics 2.2 • ancient astronomy 45 [image: astronomy_openstax_page63_img1.jpeg] eratosthenes was told that on the first day of summer at syene, egypt (near modern aswan), sunlight struck the bottom of a vertical well at noon. this indicated that the sun was directly over the well—meaning that syene was on a direct line from the center of earth to the sun. at the corresponding time and date in alexandria, eratosthenes observed the shadow a column made and saw that the sun was not directly overhead, but was slightly south of the zenith, so that its rays made an angle with the vertical equal to about 1/50 of a circle (7°). because the sun’s rays striking the two cities are parallel to one another, why would the two rays not make the same angle with earth’s surface?
eratosthenes reasoned that the curvature of the round earth meant that “straight up” was not the same in the two cities. and the measurement of the angle in alexandria, he realized, allowed him to figure out the size of earth. alexandria, he saw, must be 1/50 of earth’s circumference north of syene (figure 2.11). alexandria had been measured to be 5000 stadia north of syene. (the stadium was a greek unit of length, derived from the length of the racetrack in a stadium.) eratosthenes thus found that earth’s circumference must be , or 250,000 stadia. figure 2.11 how eratosthenes measured the size of earth. eratosthenes measured the size of earth by observing the angle at which the sun’s rays hit our planet’s surface. the sun’s rays come in parallel, but because earth’s surface curves, a ray at syene comes straight down whereas a ray at alexandria makes an angle of 7° with the vertical.
that means, in effect, that at alexandria, earth’s surface has curved away from syene by 7° of 360°, or 1/50 of a full circle. thus, the distance between the two cities must be 1/50 the circumference of earth. (credit: modification of work by noaa ocean service education) it is not possible to evaluate precisely the accuracy of eratosthenes solution because there is doubt about which of the various kinds of greek stadia he used as his unit of distance. if it was the common olympic stadium, his result is about 20% too large. according to another interpretation, he used a stadium equal to about 1/6 kilometer, in which case his figure was within 1% of the correct value of 40,000 kilometers. even if his measurement was not exact, his success at measuring the size of our planet by using only shadows, sunlight, and the power of human thought was one of the greatest intellectual achievements in history.