comets also are remnants from the formation of the solar system, but they were formed and continue (with rare exceptions) to orbit the sun in distant, cooler regions—stored in a sort of cosmic deep freeze. this is also the realm of the larger icy worlds, called dwarf planets. 232 7 • other worlds: an introduction to the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page250_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page250_img2.jpeg] figure 7.9 comet churyumov-gerasimenko (67p). this image shows comet churyumov-gerasimenko, also known as 67p, near its closest approach to the sun in 2015, as seen from the rosetta spacecraft. note the jets of gas escaping from the solid surface. (credit: modification of work by esa/rosetta/navacam, cc by-sa igo 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/)) finally, there are countless grains of broken rock, which we call cosmic dust, scattered throughout the solar system.
when these particles enter earth’s atmosphere (as millions do each day) they burn up, producing a brief flash of light in the night sky known as a meteor (meteors are often referred to as shooting stars). occasionally, some larger chunk of rocky or metallic material survives its passage through the atmosphere and lands on earth. any piece that strikes the ground is known as a meteorite. (you can see meteorites on display in many natural history museums and can sometimes even purchase pieces of them from gem and mineral dealers.) carl sagan: solar system advocate the best-known astronomer in the world during the 1970s and 1980s, carl sagan devoted most of his professional career to studying the planets and considerable energy to raising public awareness of what we can learn from exploring the solar system (see figure 7.10). born in brooklyn, new york, in 1934, sagan became interested in astronomy as a youngster; he also credits science fiction stories for sustaining his fascination with what’s out in the universe.
voyagers in astronomy 7.1 • overview of our planetary system 233 [image: astronomy_openstax_page251_img1.jpeg] figure 7.10 carl sagan (1934–1996) and neil degrasse tyson. sagan was tyson’s inspiration to become a scientist. (credit “sagan”: modification of work by nasa, jpl; credit “tyson”: modification of work by bruce f. press) in the early 1960s, when many scientists still thought venus might turn out to be a hospitable place, sagan calculated that the thick atmosphere of venus could act like a giant greenhouse, keeping the heat in and raising the temperature enormously. he showed that the seasonal changes astronomers had seen on mars were caused, not by vegetation, but by wind-blown dust. he was a member of the scientific teams for many of the robotic missions that explored the solar system and was instrumental in getting nasa to put a message-bearing plaque aboard the pioneer spacecraft, as well as audio-video records on the voyager spacecraft—all of them destined to leave our solar system entirely and send these little bits of earth technology out among the stars.
to encourage public interest and public support of planetary exploration, sagan helped found the planetary society, now the largest space-interest organization in the world. he was a tireless and eloquent advocate of the need to study the solar system close-up and the value of learning about other worlds in order to take better care of our own. sagan simulated conditions on early earth to demonstrate how some of life’s fundamental building blocks might have formed from the “primordial soup” of natural compounds on our planet. in addition, he and his colleagues developed computer models showing the consequences of nuclear war for earth would be even more devastating than anyone had thought (this is now called the nuclear winter hypothesis) and demonstrating some of the serious consequences of continued pollution of our atmosphere. sagan was perhaps best known, however, as a brilliant popularizer of astronomy and the author of many books on science, including the best-selling cosmos, and several evocative tributes to solar system exploration such as the cosmic connection and pale blue dot. his book the demon haunted world, completed just before his death in 1996, is perhaps the best antidote to fuzzy thinking about pseudo- science and irrationality in print today.