do you share einstein’s original sense that this is not the kind of universe you feel comfortable with? what do you think could have caused space to be expanding? e. in science fiction, characters sometimes talk about visiting other galaxies. discuss with your group how realistic this idea is. even if we had fast spaceships (traveling close to the speed of light, the speed limit of the universe) how likely are we to be able to reach another galaxy? why? f. despite his son’s fascination with astronomy in college, edwin hubble’s father did not want him to go into astronomy as a profession. he really wanted his son to be a lawyer and pushed him hard to learn the law when he won a fellowship to study abroad. hubble eventually defied his father and went into astronomy, becoming, as you learned in this chapter, one of the most important astronomers of all time. his dad didn’t live to see his son’s remarkable achievements. do you think he would have reconciled himself to his son’s career choice if he had? do you or does anyone in your group or among your friends have to face a choice between the passion in your heart and what others want you to do?
discuss how people in college today are dealing with such choices. 924 26 • collaborative group activities access for free at openstax.org exercises review questions 1. describe the main distinguishing features of spiral, elliptical, and irregular galaxies. 2. why did it take so long for the existence of other galaxies to be established? 3. explain what the mass-to-light ratio is and why it is smaller in spiral galaxies with regions of star formation than in elliptical galaxies. 4. if we now realize dwarf ellipticals are the most common type of galaxy, why did they escape our notice for so long? 5. what are the two best ways to measure the distance to a nearby spiral galaxy, and how would it be measured? 6. what are the two best ways to measure the distance to a distant, isolated spiral galaxy, and how would it be measured? 7. why is hubble’s law considered one of the most important discoveries in the history of astronomy? 8. what does it mean to say that the universe is expanding? what is expanding? for example, is your astronomy classroom expanding? is the solar system? why or why not? 9.
was hubble’s original estimate of the distance to the andromeda galaxy correct? explain. 10. does an elliptical galaxy rotate like a spiral galaxy? explain. 11. why does the disk of a spiral galaxy appear dark when viewed edge on? 12. what causes the largest mass-to-light ratio: gas and dust, dark matter, or stars that have burnt out? 13. what is the most useful standard bulb method for determining distances to galaxies? 14. when comparing two isolated spiral galaxies that have the same apparent brightness, but rotate at different rates, what can you say about their relative luminosity? 15. if all distant galaxies are expanding away from us, does this mean we’re at the center of the universe? 16. is the hubble constant actually constant? thought questions 17. where might the gas and dust (if any) in an elliptical galaxy come from? 18. why can we not determine distances to galaxies by the same method used to measure the parallaxes of stars? 19. which is redder—a spiral galaxy or an elliptical galaxy? 20. suppose the stars in an elliptical galaxy all formed within a few million years shortly after the universe began.
suppose these stars have a range of masses, just as the stars in our own galaxy do. how would the color of the elliptical change over the next several billion years? how would its luminosity change? why? 21. starting with the determination of the size of earth, outline a sequence of steps necessary to obtain the distance to a remote cluster of galaxies. (hint: review the chapter on celestial distances.) 22. suppose the milky way galaxy were truly isolated and that no other galaxies existed within 100 million light-years. suppose that galaxies were observed in larger numbers at distances greater than 100 million light-years. why would it be more difficult to determine accurate distances to those galaxies than if there were also galaxies relatively close by? 26 • exercises 925 23. suppose you were hubble and humason, working on the distances and doppler shifts of the galaxies. what sorts of things would you have to do to convince yourself (and others) that the relationship you were seeing between the two quantities was a real feature of the behavior of the universe? (for example, would data from two galaxies be enough to demonstrate hubble’s law?