but goodricke’s time was quickly drawing to a close; at age 21, only 2 weeks after he was elected to the royal society, he caught a cold while making astronomical observations and never recovered. today, the university of york has a building named goodricke hall and a plaque that honors his contributions to science. yet if you go to the churchyard cemetery where he is buried, an overgrown tombstone has only the initials “j. g.” to show where he lies. astronomer zdenek kopal, who looked carefully into goodricke’s life, speculated on why the marker is so modest: perhaps the rather staid goodricke relatives were ashamed of having a “deaf-mute” in the family and could not sufficiently appreciate how much a man who could not hear could nevertheless see. go to https://www.bslzone.co.uk/watch/deaf-history/deaf-history-john-goodricke (https://www.bslzone.co.uk/watch/deaf-history/deaf-history-john-goodricke) to see a short video on the life and work of john goodricke, which is part of the “deaf history” series and set up so both hearing and hearing-impaired viewers can enjoy it.
rr lyrae stars a related group of stars, whose nature was understood somewhat later than that of the cepheids, are called rr lyrae variables, named for the star rr lyrae, the best-known member of the group. more common than the cepheids, but less luminous, thousands of these pulsating variables are known in our galaxy. the periods of rr lyrae stars are always less than 1 day, and their changes in brightness are typically less than about a factor of two. astronomers have observed that the rr lyrae stars occurring in any particular cluster all have about the same apparent brightness. since stars in a cluster are all at approximately the same distance, it follows that rr lyrae variables must all have nearly the same intrinsic luminosity, which turns out to be about 50 lsun. in this sense, rr lyrae stars are a little bit like standard light bulbs and can also be used to obtain distances, particularly within our galaxy. figure 19.14 displays the ranges of periods and luminosities for both the cepheids and the rr lyrae stars.
19.3 • variable stars: one key to cosmic distances 655 figure 19.14 period-luminosity relation for cepheid variables. in this class of variable stars, the time the star takes to go through a cycle of luminosity changes is related to the average luminosity of the star. also shown are the period and luminosity for rr lyrae stars. 19.4 the h–r diagram and cosmic distances learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: variable stars are not the only way that we can estimate the luminosity of stars. another way involves the h–r diagram, which shows that the intrinsic brightness of a star can be estimated if we know its spectral type. distances from spectral types as satisfying and productive as variable stars have been for distance measurement, these stars are rare and are not found near all the objects to which we wish to measure distances. suppose, for example, we need the distance to a star that is not varying, or to a group of stars, none of which is a variable. in this case, it turns out the h–r diagram can come to our rescue.
if we can observe the spectrum of a star, we can estimate its distance from our understanding of the h–r diagram. as discussed in analyzing starlight, a detailed examination of a stellar spectrum allows astronomers to classify the star into one of the spectral types indicating surface temperature. (the types are o, b, a, f, g, k, m, l, t, and y; each of these can be divided into numbered subgroups.) in general, however, the spectral type alone is not enough to allow us to estimate luminosity. look again at figure 18.15. a g2 star could be a main- sequence star with a luminosity of 1 lsun, or it could be a giant with a luminosity of 100 lsun, or even a supergiant with a still higher luminosity. we can learn more from a star’s spectrum, however, than just its temperature. remember, for example, that we can detect pressure differences in stars from the details of the spectrum. this knowledge is very useful because giant stars are larger (and have lower pressures) than main-sequence stars, and supergiants are still larger than giants.