this false-color image of jupiter was made with the very large array (of radio telescopes) in new mexico. we see part of the magnetosphere, brightest in the middle because the largest number of charged particles are in the equatorial zone of jupiter. the planet itself is slightly smaller than the green oval in the center. different colors are used to indicate different intensities of synchrotron radiation. (credit: modification of work by i. de pater (uc berkeley) nrao, aui, nsf) learn more about the magnetosphere of jupiter (https://openstax.org/l/30nasajupmag) and why we continue to be interested in it from this brief nasa video. inside each magnetosphere, charged particles spiral around in the magnetic field; as a result, they can be accelerated to high energies. these charged particles can come from the sun or from the neighborhood of the planet itself.
in jupiter’s case, io, one of its moons, turns out to have volcanic eruptions that blast charged link to learning 376 11 • the giant planets access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page394_img1.jpeg] particles into space and right into the jovian magnetosphere. the axis of jupiter’s magnetic field (the line that connects the magnetic north pole with the magnetic south pole) is not aligned exactly with the axis of rotation of the planet; rather, it is tipped by about 10°. uranus and neptune have even greater magnetic tilts, of 60° and 55°, respectively. saturn’s field, on the other hand, is perfectly aligned with its rotation axis. why different planets have such different magnetic tilts is not well understood. the physical processes around the jovian planets turn out to be milder versions of what astronomers find in many distant objects, from the remnants of dead stars to the puzzling distant powerhouses we call quasars. one reason to study the magnetospheres of the giant planets and earth is that they provide nearby accessible analogues of more energetic and challenging cosmic processes.
11.3 atmospheres of the giant planets learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the atmospheres of the jovian planets are the parts we can observe or measure directly. since these planets have no solid surfaces, their atmospheres are more representative of their general compositions than is the case with the terrestrial planets. these atmospheres also present us with some of the most dramatic examples of weather patterns in the solar system. as we will see, storms on these planets can grow bigger than the entire planet earth. atmospheric composition when sunlight reflects from the atmospheres of the giant planets, the atmospheric gases leave their “fingerprints” in the spectrum of light. spectroscopic observations of the jovian planets began in the nineteenth century, but for a long time, astronomers were not able to interpret the spectra they observed. as late as the 1930s, the most prominent features photographed in these spectra remained unidentified. then better spectra revealed the presence of molecules of methane (ch4) and ammonia (nh3) in the atmospheres of jupiter and saturn. at first astronomers thought that methane and ammonia might be the main constituents of these atmospheres, but now we know that hydrogen and helium are actually the dominant gases.
the confusion arose because neither hydrogen nor helium possesses easily detected spectral features in the visible spectrum. it was not until the voyager spacecraft measured the far-infrared spectra of jupiter and saturn that a reliable abundance for the elusive helium could be found. the compositions of the two atmospheres are generally similar, except that on saturn there is less helium as the result of the precipitation of helium that contributes to saturn’s internal energy source. the most precise measurements of composition were made on jupiter by the galileo entry probe in 1995; as a result, we know the abundances of some elements in the jovian atmosphere even better than we know those in the sun. discuss the atmospheric composition of the giant planets describe the cloud formation and atmospheric structure of the gas giants characterize the giant planets’ wind and weather patterns understand the scale and longevity of storms on the giant planets 11.3 • atmospheres of the giant planets 377 james van allen: several planets under his belt the career of physicist james van allen spanned the birth and growth of the space age, and he played a major role in its development. born in iowa in 1914, van allen received his phd from the university of iowa.