this is because our planet’s axis of rotation is tilted by about 23.5° from a vertical line sticking out of the plane of the ecliptic (figure 2.7). being tilted from “straight up” is not at all unusual among celestial bodies; uranus and pluto are actually tilted so much that they orbit the sun “on their side.” 2.1 • the sky above 39 figure 2.7 the celestial tilt. the celestial equator is tilted by 23.5° to the ecliptic. as a result, north americans and europeans see the sun north of the celestial equator and high in our sky in june, and south of the celestial equator and low in the sky in december. the inclination of the ecliptic is the reason the sun moves north and south in the sky as the seasons change. in earth, moon, and sky, we discuss the progression of the seasons in more detail. fixed and wandering stars the sun is not the only object that moves among the fixed stars.
the moon and each of the planets that are visible to the unaided eye—mercury, venus, mars, jupiter, saturn, and uranus (although just barely)—also change their positions slowly from day to day. during a single day, the moon and planets all rise and set as earth turns, just as the sun and stars do. but like the sun, they have independent motions among the stars, superimposed on the daily rotation of the celestial sphere. noticing these motions, the greeks of 2000 years ago distinguished between what they called the fixed stars—those that maintain fixed patterns among themselves through many generations—and the wandering stars, or planets. the word “planet,” in fact, means “wanderer” in ancient greek. today, we do not regard the sun and moon as planets, but the ancients applied the term to all seven of the moving objects in the sky. much of ancient astronomy was devoted to observing and predicting the motions of these celestial wanderers. they even dedicated a unit of time, the week, to the seven objects that move on their own; that’s why there are 7 days in a week.
the moon, being earth’s nearest celestial neighbor, has the fastest apparent motion; it completes a trip around the sky in about 1 month (or moonth). to do this, the moon moves about 12°, or 24 times its own apparent width on the sky, each day. 40 2 • observing the sky: the birth of astronomy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page58_img1.jpeg] e x a m p l e 2 . 1 angles in the sky a circle consists of 360 degrees (°). when we measure the angle in the sky that something moves, we can use this formula: this is true whether the motion is measured in kilometers per hour or degrees per hour; we just need to use consistent units. as an example, let’s say you notice the bright star sirius due south from your observing location in the northern hemisphere. you note the time, and then later, you note the time that sirius sets below the horizon. you find that sirius has traveled an angular distance of about 75° in 5 h. about how many hours will it take for sirius to return to its original location?
solution the speed of sirius is if we want to know the time required for sirius to return to its original location, we need to wait until it goes around a full circle, or 360°. rearranging the formula for speed we were originally given, we find: the actual time is a few minutes shorter than this, and we will explore why in a later chapter. check your learning the moon moves in the sky relative to the background stars (in addition to moving with the stars as a result of earth’s rotation.) go outside at night and note the position of the moon relative to nearby stars. repeat the observation a few hours later. how far has the moon moved? (for reference, the diameter of the moon is about 0.5°.) based on your estimate of its motion, how long will it take for the moon to return to the position relative to the stars in which you first observed it? answer: the speed of the moon is 0.5°/1 h. to move a full 360°, the moon needs 720 h: dividing 720 h by the conversion factor of 24 h/day reveals the lunar cycle is about 30 days.