you sometimes hear the back side of the moon (the side we never see) called the “dark side.” this is a misunderstanding of the real situation: which side is light and which is dark changes as the moon moves around earth. the back side is dark no more frequently than the front side. since the moon rotates, the sun rises and sets on all sides of the moon. with apologies to pink floyd, there is simply no regular “dark side of the moon.” 4.5 • phases and motions of the moon 121 [image: astronomy_openstax_page139_img1.jpeg] 4.6 ocean tides and the moon learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: anyone living near the sea is familiar with the twice-daily rising and falling of the tides. early in history, it was clear that tides must be related to the moon because the daily delay in high tide is the same as the daily delay in the moon’s rising. a satisfactory explanation of the tides, however, awaited the theory of gravity, supplied by newton. the pull of the moon on earth the gravitational forces exerted by the moon at several points on earth are illustrated in figure 4.16.
these forces differ slightly from one another because earth is not a point, but has a certain size: all parts are not equally distant from the moon, nor are they all in exactly the same direction from the moon. moreover, earth is not perfectly rigid. as a result, the differences among the forces of the moon’s attraction on different parts of earth (called differential forces) cause earth to distort slightly. the side of earth nearest the moon is attracted toward the moon more strongly than is the center of earth, which in turn is attracted more strongly than is the side opposite the moon. thus, the differential forces tend to stretch earth slightly into an oblate spheroid (which is something like an american football shape), with its long diameter pointed toward the moon. figure 4.16 pull of the moon. the moon’s differential attraction is shown on different parts of earth. (note that the differences have been exaggerated for educational purposes.) if earth were made of water, it would distort until the moon’s differential forces over different parts of its surface came into balance with earth’s own gravitational forces pulling it together. calculations show that in this case, earth would distort from a sphere by amounts ranging up to nearly 1 meter.
measurements of the actual deformation of earth show that the solid earth does distort, but only about one-third as much as water would, because of the greater rigidity of earth’s interior. because the tidal distortion of the solid earth amounts—at its greatest—to only about 20 centimeters, earth does not distort enough to balance the moon’s differential forces with its own gravity. hence, objects at earth’s surface experience tiny horizontal tugs, tending to make them slide about. these tide-raising forces are too insignificant to affect solid objects like astronomy students or rocks in earth’s crust, but they do affect the waters in the oceans. the formation of tides the tide-raising forces, acting over a number of hours, produce motions of the water that result in measurable tidal bulges in the oceans. water on the side of earth facing the moon flows toward it, with the greatest depths describe what causes tides on earth explain why the amplitude of tides changes during the course of a month 122 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page140_img1.jpeg] roughly at the point below the moon.
on the side of earth opposite the moon, water also flows to produce a tidal bulge (figure 4.17). figure 4.17 tidal bulges in an “ideal” ocean. differences in gravity cause tidal forces that push water in the direction of tidal bulges on earth. you can run this animation (https://openstax.org/l/30visdemotidal) for a visual demonstration of the tidal bulge. note that the tidal bulges in the oceans do not result from the moon’s compressing or expanding the water, nor from the moon’s lifting the water “away from earth.” rather, they result from an actual flow of water over earth’s surface toward the two regions below and opposite the moon, causing the water to pile up to greater depths at those places (figure 4.18). figure 4.18 high and low tides. this is a side-by-side comparison of the bay of fundy in canada at high and low tides. (credit a, b: modification of work by dylan kereluk) in the idealized (and, as we shall see, oversimplified) model just described, the height of the tides would be only a few feet.