watch the ted talk (https://openstax.org/l/30tarterseti) jill tarter gave on the fascination of the search for intelligence. e x a m p l e 3 0 . 1 the drake equation at the first scientific meeting devoted to seti, frank drake wrote an equation on the blackboard that took the difficult question of estimating the number of civilizations in the galaxy and broke it down into a series of smaller, more manageable questions. ever since then, both astronomers and students have used this drake equation as a means of approaching the most challenging question: how likely is it that we are alone? since this is at present an unanswerable question, astronomer jill tarter has called the drake equation a “way of organizing our ignorance.” (see figure 30.21.) figure 30.21 drake equation. a plaque at the national radio astronomy observatory commemorates the conference where the equation was first discussed. (credit: nrao/nsf/aui) the form of the drake equation is very simple.
to estimate the number of communicating civilizations that currently exist in the galaxy (we will define these terms more carefully in a moment), we multiply the rate of formation of such civilizations (number per year) by their average lifetime (in years). in symbols, to make this formula easier to use (and more interesting), however, drake separated the rate of formation rtotal into a series of probabilities: link to learning 1082 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1100_img1.jpeg] rstar is the rate of formation of stars like the sun in our galaxy, which is, very roughly, around 10 stars per year. each of the other terms is a fraction or probability (less than or equal to 1.0), and the product of all these probabilities is itself the total probability that each star will have an intelligent, technological, communicating civilization that we might want to talk to.
we have: • fp = the fraction of these stars with planets • fe = the fraction of the planetary systems that include habitable planets • fl = the fraction of habitable planets that actually support life • fi = the fraction of inhabited planets that develop advanced intelligence • fc = the fraction of these intelligent civilizations that develop science and the technology to build radio telescopes and transmitters each of these factors can be discussed and perhaps evaluated, but we must guess at many of the values. in particular, we don’t know how to calculate the probability of something that happened once on earth but has not been observed elsewhere—and these include the development of life, of intelligent life, and of technological life (the last three factors in the equation). one important advance in estimating the terms of the drake equation comes from the recent discovery of exoplanets. when the drake equation was first written, no one had any idea whether planets and planetary systems were common. now we know they are—another example of the copernican principle. solution even if we don’t know the answers, we can make some guesses and calculate the resulting number n. let’s start with the optimism implicit in the copernican principle and set the last three terms equal to 1.0.
if r is 10 stars/year and if we measure the average lifetime of a technological civilization in years, the units of years cancel. if we also assume that fp is 0.1, and fe is 1.0, the equation becomes now we see the importance of the term l, the lifetime of a communicating civilization (measured in years). we have had this capability (to communicate at the distances of the stars) for only a few decades. check your learning suppose we assume that this stage in our history lasts only one century. answer: with our optimistic assumptions about the other factors, l = 100 years and n = 100 such civilizations in the entire galaxy. in that case, there are so few other civilizations like ours that we are unlikely to detect any signals in a seti search. but suppose the average lifetime is a million years; in that case, there are a million such civilizations in the galaxy, and some of them may be within range for radio communication. the most important conclusion from this calculation is that even if we are extremely optimistic about the probabilities, the only way we can expect success from seti is if other civilizations are much older (and hence probably much more advanced) than ours.