another model solar system is in washington on the mall between the white house and congress (perhaps proving they are worlds apart?). link to learning 7.1 • overview of our planetary system 235 this model of the solar system (https://openstax.org/l/30modsolsys) shows all orbits and sizes to scale, and it lets you fly between the planets at an enhanced speed. names in the solar system we humans just don’t feel comfortable until something has a name. types of butterflies, new elements, and the mountains of venus all need names for us to feel we are acquainted with them. how do we give names to objects and features in the solar system? planets and moons are named after gods and heroes in greek and roman mythology (with a few exceptions among the moons of uranus, which have names drawn from english literature). when william herschel, a german immigrant to england, first discovered the planet we now call uranus, he wanted to name it georgium sidus (george’s star) after king george iii of his adopted country. this caused such an outcry among astronomers in other nations, however, that the classic tradition was upheld—and has been maintained ever since.
luckily, there were a lot of minor gods in the ancient pantheon, so plenty of names are left for the many small moons we are discovering around the giant planets. (appendix g lists the larger moons). more recently, the names of dwarf planets and their moons have been drawn from the mythology of other cultures besides greek and roman. comets are often named after their discoverers (offering an extra incentive to comet hunters). asteroids are named by their discoverers after just about anyone or anything they want. recently, asteroid names have been used to recognize people who have made significant contributions to astronomy, including the three senior authors of this book. that was pretty much all the naming that was needed while our study of the solar system was confined to earth. but now, our spacecraft have surveyed and photographed many worlds in great detail, and each world has a host of features that also need names. to make sure that naming things in space remains multinational, rational, and somewhat dignified, astronomers have given the responsibility of approving names to a special committee of the international astronomical union (iau), the body that includes scientists from every country that does astronomy. this iau committee has developed a set of rules for naming features on other worlds.
for example, craters on venus are named for women who have made significant contributions to human knowledge and welfare. volcanic features on jupiter’s moon io, which is in a constant state of volcanic activity, are named after gods of fire and thunder from the mythologies of many cultures. craters on mercury commemorate famous novelists, playwrights, artists, and composers. on saturn’s moon tethys, all the features are named after characters and places in homer’s great epic poem, the odyssey. as we explore further, it may well turn out that more places in the solar system need names than earth history can provide. perhaps by then, explorers and settlers on these worlds will be ready to develop their own names for the places they may (if but for a while) call home. you may be surprised to know that the meaning of the word planet has recently become controversial because we have discovered many other planetary systems that don’t look very much like our own. even within our solar system, the planets differ greatly in size and chemical properties.
the biggest dispute link to learning making connections 236 7 • other worlds: an introduction to the solar system access for free at openstax.org concerns pluto, which is much smaller than the other eight major planets. the category of dwarf planet was invented to include pluto and similar icy objects beyond neptune. but is a dwarf planet also a planet? logically, it should be, but even this simple issue of grammar has been the subject of heated debate among both astronomers and the general public. 7.2 composition and structure of planets learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the fact that there are two distinct kinds of planets—the rocky terrestrial planets and the gas-rich jovian planets—leads us to believe that they formed under different conditions. certainly their compositions are dominated by different elements. let us look at each type in more detail. the giant planets the two largest planets, jupiter and saturn, have nearly the same chemical makeup as the sun; they are composed primarily of the two elements hydrogen and helium, with 75% of their mass being hydrogen and 25% helium. on earth, both hydrogen and helium are gases, so jupiter and saturn are sometimes called gas planets. but, this name is misleading.