check out the nasa briefing (https://openstax.org/l/30elmagsp1) or nasa’s 5-minute introductory video (https://openstax.org/l/30elmagsp2) to learn more about the electromagnetic spectrum. radiation laws to understand, in more quantitative detail, the relationship between temperature and electromagnetic radiation, we imagine an idealized object called a blackbody. such an object (unlike your sweater or your astronomy instructor’s head) does not reflect or scatter any radiation, but absorbs all the electromagnetic energy that falls onto it. the energy that is absorbed causes the atoms and molecules in it to vibrate or move around at increasing speeds. as it gets hotter, this object will radiate electromagnetic waves until absorption and radiation are in balance. we want to discuss such an idealized object because, as you will see, stars behave in very nearly the same way. the radiation from a blackbody has several characteristics, as illustrated in figure 5.8. the graph shows the link to learning 152 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org power emitted at each wavelength by objects of different temperatures.
in science, the word power means the energy coming off per second (and it is typically measured in watts, which you are probably familiar with from buying lightbulbs). figure 5.8 radiation laws illustrated. this graph shows in arbitrary units how many photons are given off at each wavelength for objects at four different temperatures. the wavelengths corresponding to visible light are shown by the colored bands. note that at hotter temperatures, more energy (in the form of photons) is emitted at all wavelengths. the higher the temperature, the shorter the wavelength at which the peak amount of energy is radiated (this is known as wien’s law). first of all, notice that the curves show that, at each temperature, our blackbody object emits radiation (photons) at all wavelengths (all colors). this is because in any solid or denser gas, some molecules or atoms vibrate or move between collisions slower than average and some move faster than average. so when we look at the electromagnetic waves emitted, we find a broad range, or spectrum, of energies and wavelengths. more energy is emitted at the average vibration or motion rate (the highest part of each curve), but if we have a large number of atoms or molecules, some energy will be detected at each wavelength.
second, note that an object at a higher temperature emits more power at all wavelengths than does a cooler one. in a hot gas (the taller curves in figure 5.8), for example, the atoms have more collisions and give off more energy. in the real world of stars, this means that hotter stars give off more energy at every wavelength than do cooler stars. third, the graph shows us that the higher the temperature, the shorter the wavelength at which the maximum power is emitted. remember that a shorter wavelength means a higher frequency and energy. it makes sense, then, that hot objects give off a larger fraction of their energy at shorter wavelengths (higher energies) than do cool objects. you may have observed examples of this rule in everyday life. when a burner on an electric stove is turned on low, it emits only heat, which is infrared radiation, but does not glow with visible light. if the burner is set to a higher temperature, it starts to glow a dull red. at a still-higher setting, it glows a brighter orange-red (shorter wavelength). at even higher temperatures, which cannot be reached with ordinary stoves, metal can appear brilliant yellow or even blue-white.
we can use these ideas to come up with a rough sort of “thermometer” for measuring the temperatures of stars. because many stars give off most of their energy in visible light, the color of light that dominates a star’s appearance is a rough indicator of its temperature. if one star looks red and another looks blue, which one has the higher temperature? because blue is the shorter-wavelength color, it is the sign of a hotter star. (note that the temperatures we associate with different colors in science are not the same as the ones artists use. in art, 5.2 • the electromagnetic spectrum 153 [image: astronomy_openstax_page171_img1.jpeg] red is often called a “hot” color and blue a “cool” color. likewise, we commonly see red on faucet or air conditioning controls to indicate hot temperatures and blue to indicate cold temperatures. although these are common uses to us in daily life, in nature, it’s the other way around.) we can develop a more precise star thermometer by measuring how much energy a star gives off at each wavelength and by constructing diagrams like figure 5.8. the location of the peak (or maximum) in the power curve of each star can tell us its temperature.