when the blast wave from the explosion then reached the town, it blew out the windows. about 1500 people had to seek link to learning link to learning recognize the threat that near-earth objects represent for earth discuss possible defensive strategies to protect our planet 446 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org medical attention from injuries from the shattered glass. a much larger atmospheric explosion took place in russia in 1908, caused by an asteroid about 60 meters in diameter, releasing an energy of 10 megatons, as large the most powerful nuclear weapons of today. fortunately, the area directly affected, on the tunguska river in siberia, was unpopulated, and no one was killed. however, the area of forest destroyed by the blast was large—equal to the size of a major city (figure 13.13). together with any comets that come close to our planet, such asteroids are known collectively as near-earth objects (neos). as we saw in cosmic influences on the evolution of earth (and as the dinosaurs found out 65 million years ago,) the collision of a significant-sized neo could be a catastrophe for life on our planet.
figure 13.13 impacts with earth. (a) as the chelyabinsk meteor passed through the atmosphere, it left a trail of smoke and briefly became as bright as the sun. (b) hundreds of kilometers of forest trees were knocked down and burned at the tunguska impact site. (credit a: modification of work by alex alishevskikh) visit the video compilation (https://openstax.org/l/30vidcomchelmet) of the chelyabinsk meteor streaking through the sky over the city on february 15, 2013, as taken by people who were in the area when it occurred. view this video of a non-technical talk by david morrison (https://openstax.org/l/30davmorrison) to watch “the chelyabinsk meteor: can we survive a bigger impact?” dr. morrison (seti institute and nasa ames research center) discusses the chelyabinsk impact and how we learn about neos and protect ourselves; the talk is from the silicon valley astronomy lectures series. astronomers have urged that the first step in protecting earth from future impacts by neos must be to learn what potential impactors are out there.
in 1998, nasa began the spaceguard survey, with the goal to discover and track 90% of earth-approaching asteroids greater than 1 kilometer in diameter. the size of 1 kilometer was selected to include all asteroids capable of causing global damage, not merely local or regional effects. at 1 kilometer or larger, the impact could blast so much dust into the atmosphere that the sunlight would be dimmed for months, causing global crop failures—an event that could threaten the survival of our civilization. the spaceguard goal of 90% was reached in 2012 when nearly a thousand of these 1-kilometer near-earth asteroids (neas) had been found, along with more than 10,000 smaller asteroids. figure 13.14 shows how the link to learning link to learning 13.2 • asteroids and planetary defense 447 [image: astronomy_openstax_page465_img1.jpeg] pace of nea discoveries has been increasing over recent years. by 2021, astronomers knew of more than 25,000. figure 13.14 discovery of near-earth asteroids.
the accelerating rate of discovery of neas is illustrated in this graph, which shows the total number of known neas, the number over 140 meters in diameter, and the number over 1 kilometer in diameter, the size that poses the dominant impact risk on earth. how did astronomers know when they had discovered 90% of the larger asteroids? there are several ways to estimate the total number, even before they were individually located. one way is to look at the numbers of large craters on the dark lunar maria. remember that these craters were made by impacts just like the ones we are considering. they are preserved on the moon’s airless surface, whereas earth soon erases the imprints of past impacts. thus, the number of large craters on the moon allows us to estimate how often impacts have occurred on both the moon and earth over the past several billion years. the number of impacts is directly related to the number of asteroids and comets on earth-crossing orbits. another approach is to see how often the surveys (which are automated searches for faint points of light that move among the stars) rediscover a previously known asteroid. at the beginning of a survey, all the neas it finds will be new.