(in old-fashioned units, that’s over 2 million miles per hour!) in our sun, such extreme temperatures are reached only in the regions near its center, which has a temperature of 15 million k. calculations show that nearly all of the sun’s energy is generated within about 150,000 kilometers of its core, or within less than 10% of its total volume. even at these high temperatures, it is exceedingly difficult to force two protons to combine. on average, a proton will rebound from other protons in the sun’s crowded core for about 14 billion years, at the rate of 100 million collisions per second, before it fuses with a second proton. this is, however, only the average waiting time. some of the enormous numbers of protons in the sun’s inner region are “lucky” and take only a few collisions to achieve a fusion reaction: they are the protons responsible for producing the energy radiated by the sun. since the sun is about 4.5 billion years old, most of its protons have not yet been involved in fusion reactions.
this visualization of proton collision (https://openstax.org/l/30protoncollide) illustrates the need for protons to be at high temperatures so they can move at high enough speed to overcome electrical repulsion, and to be able to undergo fusion. nuclear reactions in the sun’s interior the sun, then, taps the energy contained in the nuclei of atoms through nuclear fusion. let’s look at what happens in more detail. deep inside the sun, a three-step process takes four hydrogen nuclei and fuses them together to form a single helium nucleus. the helium nucleus is slightly less massive than the four hydrogen nuclei that combine to form it, and that mass is converted into energy. the initial step required to form one helium nucleus from four hydrogen nuclei is shown in figure 16.6. at the high temperatures inside the sun’s core, two protons combine to make a deuterium nucleus, which is an isotope (or version) of hydrogen that contains one proton and one neutron. in effect, one of the original protons has been converted into a neutron in the fusion reaction. electric charge has to be conserved in nuclear reactions, and it is conserved in this one.
a positron (antimatter electron) emerges from the reaction and carries away the positive charge originally associated with one of the protons. figure 16.6 proton-proton chain, step 1. this is the first step in the process of fusing hydrogen into helium in the sun. high temperatures are required because this reaction starts with two hydrogen nuclei, which are protons (shown in blue at left) that must overcome electrical repulsion to combine, forming a hydrogen nucleus with a proton and a neutron (shown in red). note that hydrogen containing one proton and one neutron is given its own name: deuterium. also produced in this reaction are a positron, which is an antielectron, and an elusive particle named the neutrino. since it is antimatter, this positron will instantly collide with a nearby electron, and both will be annihilated, producing electromagnetic energy in the form of gamma-ray photons. this gamma ray, which has been created in the center of the sun, finds itself in a world crammed full of fast-moving nuclei and electrons.
the link to learning 16.2 • mass, energy, and the theory of relativity 551 [image: astronomy_openstax_page569_img1.jpeg] gamma ray collides with particles of matter and transfers its energy to one of them. the particle later emits another gamma-ray photon, but often the emitted photon has a bit less energy than the one that was absorbed. such interactions happen to gamma rays again and again and again as they make their way slowly toward the outer layers of the sun, until their energy becomes so reduced that they are no longer gamma rays but x-rays (recall what you learned in the electromagnetic spectrum). later, as the photons lose still more energy through collisions in the crowded center of the sun, they become ultraviolet photons. by the time they reach the sun’s surface, most of the photons have given up enough energy to be ordinary light—and they are the sunlight we see coming from our star. (to be precise, each gamma-ray photon is ultimately converted into many separate lower-energy photons of sunlight.) so, the sunlight given off by the sun today had its origin as a gamma ray produced by nuclear reactions deep in the sun’s core.