this angle is 90 °. travel one quarter of the way around the world and turn back northward. this is another 90 ° angle. stop when you get to the north pole. you have finished the triangle, and the angle of this third corner is also 90 °, for a total of 270 °. this is much larger than the triangle in flat space. this geometry is riemannian geometry. the lines followed on the surface of the earth are straight lines in this geometry. in the case of a low density universe, space is again curved but very differently and this is called an open universe. the two dimensional equivalent of an open universe is the shape of a saddleback. a triangle drawn on this space would have angles that total less than 180 ° (see figure 424). this is lobachevsky geometry. the verdict it is apparent, from studying the red shifts of supernovae and cepheid variable stars that the universe is indeed expanding and there is evidence that the expansion is accelerating! but the universe must be very close to the critical density. if not, it would have already collapsed or distant galaxies would have already expanded beyond the visible universe.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page346_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 347 figure 425: olbers' paradox photo by tom harpel in a homogeneous, isotropic, infinite, and static universe, the entire sky would be as bright as the sun component 167 – olber’s paradox a paradox is when the evidence shows something that is contradictory to a prediction made on sound reasoning. olber’s paradox is an example. if we assume that: • the universe is homogeneous • the universe is isotropic • the universe is infinite • the universe is unchanging then it follows that there are galaxies and stars in every direction. no matter where you look, you will eventually run into a star. this means that every spot in the sky has starlight. so this implies that the night sky should be as bright as the surface of the sun. this is obviously not reality. the sky is indeed dark at night. since there is a paradox, at least one of the assumptions must be incorrect. the first two, the cosmological principle, seem to be correct. either the universe is not infinite, or it must be changing over time. figure 425 demonstrates how olbers’ paradox works.
in the middle of the forest, no matter in which direction you look you see a tree. the closer ones are bigger (brighter), but even the more distant ones (dimmer) fill in all of the gaps. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page347_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 348 the center of the universe is everywhere! the big bang is the start of time, space, all matter, and energy figure 426: models of an expanding universe component 168 – the big bang: what, when, & where starting in 1917, vesto silpher noted that most galaxies were receding away from us. in 1927, using einstein’s equations in the theory of relativity, georges lemaître developed the equations to describe that expansion and the constant that defines the rate of expansion. in 1929, edwin hubble, confirmed the relationship and refined the value of the constant now known as hubble’s constant (h0). in 1927, georges lemaître also noted that if the universe is expanding now, then it must have been smaller in the past.
if you trace backwards further, there is a point where all of the galaxies in the universe start as a single point, a singularity. at the time, most scientists believed that the universe was in a steady state. einstein himself believed this to be the case. in 1949 fred hoyle mockingly referred to this new theory as the big bang theory. it turns out, that in light of the evidence, there appears to have been a big bang in the past and the universe is not in a steady state. if the universe started as a singularity, then there is no center of the universe, or perhaps it is better to say that everywhere is the center of the universe. the big bang is defined as the start of time, space, matter, and energy. based on this definition, there was nothing before the big bang, and therefore nothing to discuss as far as what existed before the big bang. the answer is – nothing! if we combine all of the information for the universe we see today, it is possible to determine when in the past everything was a singularity. this is the big bang itself. it appears to be 13.8 billion years ago.