30.3 • searching for life beyond earth 1069 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1087_img1.jpeg] figure 30.13 jupiter’s moon europa, as imaged by nasa’s galileo mission. the relative scarcity of craters on europa suggests a surface that is “geologically young,” and the network of colored ridges and cracks suggests constant activity and motion. galileo’s instruments also strongly suggested the presence of a massive ocean of salty liquid water beneath the icy crust. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/seti institute) in 2005, the cassini mission performed a close flyby of a small (500-kilometer diameter) moon of saturn, enceladus (figure 30.14), and made a remarkable discovery. plumes of gas and icy material were venting from the moon’s south polar region at a collective rate of about 250 kilograms of material per second. several observations, including the discovery of salts associated with the icy material, suggest that their source is a liquid water ocean beneath tens of kilometers of ice.
although it remains to be shown definitively whether the ocean is local or global, transient or long-lived, it does appear to be in contact, and to have reacted, with a rocky interior. as on europa, this is probably a necessary—though not sufficient—condition for habitability. what makes enceladus so enticing to planetary scientists, though, are those plumes of material that seem to come directly from its ocean: samples of the interior are there for the taking by any spacecraft sent flying through. for a future mission, such samples could yield evidence not only of whether enceladus is habitable but, indeed, of whether it is home to life. figure 30.14 image of saturn’s moon enceladus from nasa’s cassini mission. the south polar region was found to have multiple plumes of ice and gas that, combined, are venting about 250 kilograms of material per second into space. such features suggest that enceladus, like europa, has a sub-ice ocean. (credit: nasa/jpl/ ssi) saturn’s big moon titan is very different from both enceladus and europa (see figure 30.15).
although it may host a liquid water layer deep within its interior, it is the surface of titan and its unusual chemistry that makes this moon such an interesting place. titan’s thick atmosphere—the only one among moons in the solar system—is composed mostly of nitrogen but also of about 5% methane. in the upper atmosphere, the sun’s ultraviolet light breaks apart and recombines these molecules into more complex organic compounds that are collectively known as tholins. the tholins shroud titan in an orange haze, and imagery from cassini and from the huygens probe that descended to titan’s surface show that heavier particles appear to accumulate on the surface, even forming “dunes” that are cut and sculpted by flows of liquid hydrocarbons (such as liquid 1070 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1088_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page1088_img2.jpeg] methane). some scientists see this organic chemical factory as a natural laboratory that may yield some clues about the solar system’s early chemistry—perhaps even chemistry that could support the origin of life.
figure 30.15 image of saturn’s moon titan from nasa’s cassini mission. (a) the hazy orange glow comes from titan’s thick atmosphere (the only one known among the moons of the solar system). that atmosphere is mostly nitrogen but also contains methane and potentially a variety of complex organic compounds. the bright spot near the top of the image is sunlight reflected from a very flat surface—almost certainly a liquid. we see this effect, called “glint,” when sunlight reflects off the surface of a lake or ocean. (b) cassini radar imagery shows what look very much like landforms and lakes on the surface of titan. but the surface lakes and oceans of titan are not water; they are probably made of liquid hydrocarbons like methane and ethane. (credit a: modification of work by nasa/jpl/university of arizona/dlr; credit b: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/asi) in january 2005, the huygens probe descended to the surface of titan and relayed data, including imagery of the landing site, for about 90 minutes.