1 extreme gravity in this section, you were introduced to some very dense objects. how would those objects’ gravity affect you? recall that the force of gravity, f, between two bodies is calculated as where g is the gravitational constant, are the masses of the two bodies, and r is their separation. also, from newton’s second law, where a is the acceleration of a body with mass m. so let’s consider the situation of a mass—say, you—standing on a body, such as earth or a white dwarf (where we assume you will be wearing a heat-proof space suit). you are m1 and the body you are standing on is m2. the distance between you and the center of gravity of the body on which you stand is its radius, r. the force exerted on you is solving for a, the acceleration of gravity on that world, we get note that we have replaced the general symbol for acceleration, a, with the symbol scientists use for the acceleration of gravity, g. say that a particular white dwarf has the mass of the sun but the radius of earth . what is the acceleration of gravity at the surface of the white dwarf?
solution the acceleration of gravity at the surface of the white dwarf is compare this to g on the surface of earth, which is 9.8 m/s2. check your learning what is the acceleration of gravity at the surface if the white dwarf has the twice the mass of the sun and is only half the radius of earth? answer: 23.2 • evolution of massive stars: an explosive finish 789 23.3 supernova observations learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: supernovae were discovered long before astronomers realized that these spectacular cataclysms mark the death of stars (see making connections: supernovae in history). the word nova means “new” in latin; before telescopes, when a star too dim to be seen with the unaided eye suddenly flared up in a brilliant explosion, observers concluded it must be a brand-new star. twentieth-century astronomers reclassified the explosions with the greatest luminosity as supernovae.
from historical records of such explosions, from studies of the remnants of supernovae in our galaxy, and from analyses of supernovae in other galaxies, we estimate that, on average, one supernova explosion occurs somewhere in the milky way galaxy every 25 to 100 years. unfortunately, however, no supernova explosion has been observable in our galaxy since the invention of the telescope. either we have been exceptionally unlucky or, more likely, recent explosions have taken place in parts of the galaxy where interstellar dust blocks light from reaching us. supernovae in history although many supernova explosions in our own galaxy have gone unnoticed, a few were so spectacular that they were clearly seen and recorded by sky watchers and historians at the time. we can use these records, going back two millennia, to help us pinpoint where the exploding stars were and thus where to look for their remnants today. the most dramatic supernova was observed in the year 1006. it appeared in may as a brilliant point of light visible during the daytime, perhaps 100 times brighter than the planet venus. it was bright enough to cast shadows on the ground during the night and was recorded with awe and fear by observers all over europe and asia.
no one had seen anything like it before; chinese astronomers, noting that it was a temporary spectacle, called it a “guest star.” astronomers david clark and richard stephenson have scoured records from around the world to find more than 20 reports of the 1006 supernova (sn 1006) (figure 23.9). this has allowed them to determine with some accuracy where in the sky the explosion occurred. they place it in the modern constellation of lupus; at roughly the position they have determined, we find a supernova remnant, now quite faint. from the way its filaments are expanding, it indeed appears to be about 1000 years old. describe the observed features of sn 1987a both before and after the supernova explain how observations of various parts of the sn 1987a event helped confirm theories about supernovae making connections 790 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org figure 23.9 supernova 1006 remnant. this composite view of sn 1006 from the chandra x-ray observatory shows the x-rays coming from the remnant in blue, visible light in white-yellow, and radio emission in red.