but although these giant planets got hotter than their terrestrial siblings, they were far too small to raise their central temperatures and pressures to the point where nuclear reactions could begin (and it is such reactions that give us our definition of a star). after glowing dull red for a few thousand years, the giant planets gradually cooled to their present state (figure 14.13). 490 14 • cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system access for free at openstax.org figure 14.13 saturn seen in infrared. this image from the cassini spacecraft is stitched together from 65 individual observations. sunlight reflected at a wavelength of 2 micrometers is shown as blue, sunlight reflected at 3 micrometers is shown as green, and heat radiated from saturn’s interior at 5 micrometers is red. for example, saturn’s rings reflect sunlight at 2 micrometers, but not at 3 and 5 micrometers, so they appear blue. saturn’s south polar regions are seen glowing with internal heat.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl/university of arizona) the collapse of gas from the nebula onto the cores of the giant planets explains how these objects acquired nearly the same hydrogen-rich composition as the sun. the process was most efficient for jupiter and saturn; hence, their compositions are most nearly “cosmic.” much less gas was captured by uranus and neptune, which is why these two planets have compositions dominated by the icy and rocky building blocks that made up their large cores rather than by hydrogen and helium. the initial formation period ended when much of the available raw material was used up and the solar wind (the flow of atomic particles) from the young sun blew away the remaining supply of lighter gases. further evolution of the system all the processes we have just described, from the collapse of the solar nebula to the formation of protoplanets, took place within a few million years. however, the story of the formation of the solar system was not complete at this stage; there were many planetesimals and other debris that did not initially accumulate to form the planets. what was their fate? the comets visible to us today are merely the tip of the cosmic iceberg (if you’ll pardon the pun).
most comets are believed to be in the oort cloud, far from the region of the planets. additional comets and icy dwarf planets are in the kuiper belt, which stretches beyond the orbit of neptune. these icy pieces probably formed near the present orbits of uranus and neptune but were ejected from their initial orbits by the gravitational influence of the giant planets. in the inner parts of the system, remnant planetesimals and perhaps several dozen protoplanets continued to whiz about. over the vast span of time we are discussing, collisions among these objects were inevitable. giant impacts at this stage may have stripped mercury of part of its mantle and crust, reversed the rotation of venus, and broke off part of earth to create the moon (all events we discussed in other chapters). smaller-scale impacts also added mass to the inner protoplanets. because the gravity of the giant planets could “stir up” the orbits of the planetesimals, the material impacting on the inner protoplanets could have come from almost anywhere within the solar system. in contrast to the previous stage of accretion, therefore, this new material did not represent just a narrow range of compositions.
as a result, much of the debris striking the inner planets was ice-rich material that had condensed in the outer part of the solar nebula. as this comet-like bombardment progressed, earth accumulated the water and various organic compounds that would later be critical to the formation of life. mars and venus probably also acquired abundant water and organic materials from the same source. gradually, as the planets swept up or ejected the remaining debris, most of the planetesimals disappeared. in 14.3 • formation of the solar system 491 [image: astronomy_openstax_page509_img1.jpeg] two regions, however, stable orbits are possible where leftover planetesimals could avoid impacting the planets or being ejected from the system. these regions are the asteroid belt between mars and jupiter and the kuiper belt beyond neptune. the planetesimals (and their fragments) that survive in these special locations are what we now call asteroids, comets, and trans-neptunian objects. astronomers used to think that the solar system that emerged from this early evolution was similar to what we see today.