the predictions are that with this powerful infrared instrument, we should be able to look back far enough to analyze in detail the formation of the first galaxies—only a few hundred million years after the expansion of the universe began 13.8 billion years ago. 29.5 • what is the universe really made of? 1039 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1057_img1.jpeg] 29.6 the inflationary universe learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the hot big bang model that we have been describing is remarkably successful. it accounts for the expansion of the universe, explains the observations of the cmb, and correctly predicts the abundances of the light elements. as it turns out, this model also predicts that there should be exactly three types of neutrinos in nature, and this prediction has been confirmed by experiments with high-energy accelerators. we can’t relax just yet, however. this standard model of the universe doesn’t explain all the observations we have made about the universe as a whole. problems with the standard big bang model there are a number of characteristics of the universe that can only be explained by considering further what might have happened before the emission of the cmb.
one problem with the standard big bang model is that it does not explain why the density of the universe is equal to the critical density. the mass density could have been, after all, so low and the effects of dark energy so high that the expansion would have been too rapid to form any galaxies at all. alternatively, there could have been so much matter that the universe would have already begun to contract long before now. why is the universe balanced so precisely on the knife edge of the critical density? another puzzle is the remarkable uniformity of the universe. the temperature of the cmb is the same to about 1 part in 100,000 everywhere we look. this sameness might be expected if all the parts of the visible universe were in contact at some point in time and had the time to come to the same temperature. in the same way, if we put some ice into a glass of lukewarm water and wait a while, the ice will melt and the water will cool down until they are the same temperature. however, if we accept the standard big bang model, all parts of the visible universe were not in contact at any time. the fastest that information can go from one point to another is the speed of light.
there is a maximum distance that light can have traveled from any point since the time the universe began—that’s the distance light could have covered since then. this distance is called that point’s horizon distance because anything farther away is “below its horizon”—unable to make contact with it. one region of space separated by more than the horizon distance from another has been completely isolated from it through the entire history of the universe. if we measure the cmb in two opposite directions in the sky, we are observing regions that were significantly beyond each other’s horizon distance at the time the cmb was emitted. we can see both regions, but they can never have seen each other. why, then, are their temperatures so precisely the same? according to the standard big bang model, they have never been able to exchange information, and there is no reason they should have identical temperatures. (it’s a little like seeing the clothes that all the students wear at two schools in different parts of the world become identical, without the students ever having been in contact.) the only explanation we could suggest was simply that the universe somehow started out being absolutely uniform (which is like saying all students were born liking the same clothes).
scientists are always uncomfortable when they must appeal to a special set of initial conditions to account for what they see. the inflationary hypothesis some physicists suggested that these fundamental characteristics of the cosmos—its flatness and describe two important properties of the universe that the simple big bang model cannot explain explain why these two characteristics of the universe can be accounted for if there was a period of rapid expansion (inflation) of the universe just after the big bang name the four forces that control all physical processes in the universe 1040 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org uniformity—can be explained if shortly after the big bang (and before the emission of the cmb), the universe experienced a sudden increase in size. a model universe in which this rapid, early expansion occurs is called an inflationary universe. the inflationary universe is identical to the big bang universe for all time after the first 10–30 second. prior to that, the model suggests that there was a brief period of extraordinarily rapid expansion or inflation, during which the scale of the universe increased by a factor of about 1030 times more than predicted by standard big bang models (figure 29.25). figure 29.25 expansion of the universe.