compare the properties of the volcanoes on io with those of terrestrial volcanoes. give at least two similarities and two differences. 16. would you expect to find more impact craters on io or callisto? why? 17. why is it unlikely that humans will be traveling to io? (hint: review the information about jupiter’s magnetosphere in the giant planets.) 18. why do you suppose the rings of saturn are made of bright particles, whereas the particles in the rings of uranus and neptune are black? 19. suppose you miraculously removed all of saturn’s moons. what would happen to its rings? 20. we have a lot of good images of the large moons of jupiter and saturn from the galileo and cassini spacecraft missions (check out nasa’s planetary photojournal site, at http://photojournal.jpl.nasa.gov, to see the variety). now that the new horizons mission has gone to pluto, why don’t we have as many good images of all sides of pluto and charon? 21.
in the star wars movie star wars episode vi: return of the jedi, a key battle takes place on the inhabited “forest moon” endor, which supposedly orbits around a gas giant planet. from what you have learned about planets and moons of the solar system, why would this be an unusual situation? figuring for yourself 22. which would have the longer orbital period: a moon 1 million km from the center of jupiter, or a moon 1 432 12 • exercises access for free at openstax.org million km from the center of earth? why? 23. how close to uranus would a spacecraft have to get to obtain the same resolution as in example 12.1 with a camera that has an angular resolution of 2 arcsec? 24. saturn’s a, b, and c rings extend 75,000 to 137,000 km from the center of the planet. use kepler’s third law to calculate the difference between how long a particle at the inner edge and a particle at the outer edge of the three-ring system would take to revolve about the planet. 25. use the information in appendix g to calculate what you would weigh on titan, io, and uranus’ moon miranda. 26.
the average distance of enceladus from saturn is 238,000 km; the average distance of titan from saturn is 1,222,000 km. how much longer does it take titan to orbit saturn compared to enceladus? 12 • exercises 433 434 12 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 13.1 hale-bopp. comet hale-bopp was one of the most attractive and easily visible comets of the twentieth century. it is shown here as it appeared in the sky in march 1997. you can see the comet’s long blue ion tail and the shorter white dust tail. you will learn about these two types of comet tails, and how they form, in this chapter. (credit: modification of work by eso/e. slawik) chapter outline 13.1 asteroids 13.2 asteroids and planetary defense 13.3 the “long-haired” comets 13.4 the origin and fate of comets and related objects thinking ahead hundreds of smaller members of the solar system—asteroids and comets—are known to have crossed earth’s orbit in the past, and many others will do so in centuries ahead.
what could we do if we knew a few years in advance that one of these bodies would hit earth? to understand the early history of life on earth, scientists study ancient fossils. to reconstruct the early history of the solar system, we need cosmic fossils—materials that formed when our system was very young. however, reconstructing the early history of the solar system by looking just at the planets is almost as difficult as determining the circumstances of human birth by merely looking at an adult. instead, we turn to the surviving remnants of the creation process—ancient but smaller objects in our cosmic neighborhood. asteroids are rocky or metallic and contain little volatile (easily evaporated) material. comets are small icy objects that contain frozen water and other volatile materials but with solid grains mixed in. in the deep freeze beyond neptune, we also have a large reservoir of material unchanged since the formation of the solar system, as well as a number of dwarf planets.