the more densely cratered the surface, the greater its age. the largest crater on venus (called mead) is 275 kilometers in diameter, slightly larger than the largest known terrestrial crater (chicxulub), but much smaller than the lunar impact basins. figure 10.7 impact craters on venus. (a) these large impact craters are in the lavinia region of venus. because they are rough, the crater rims and ejecta appear brighter in these radar images than do the smoother surrounding lava plains. the largest of these craters has a diameter of 50 kilometers. (b) this small, complex crater is named after writer gertrude stein. the triple impact was caused by the breaking apart of the incoming asteroid during its passage through the thick atmosphere of venus. the projectile had an initial diameter of between 1 and 2 kilometers.
(credit a: modification of work by nasa/jpl; credit b: modification of work by nasa/jpl) 10.2 • the geology of venus 329 [image: astronomy_openstax_page347_img1.jpeg] you might think that the thick atmosphere of venus would protect the surface from impacts, burning up the projectiles long before they could reach the surface. but this is the case for only smaller projectiles. crater statistics show very few craters less than 10 kilometers in diameter, indicating that projectiles smaller than about 1 kilometer (the size that typically produces a 10-kilometer crater) were stopped by the atmosphere. those craters with diameters from 10 to 30 kilometers are frequently distorted or multiple, apparently because the incoming projectile broke apart in the atmosphere before it could strike the ground as shown in the stein crater in figure 10.7. if we limit ourselves to impacts that produce craters with diameters of 30 kilometers or larger, however, then crater counts are as useful on venus for measuring surface age as they are on airless bodies such as the moon.
the large craters in the venusian plains indicate an average surface age that is only between 300 and 600 million years. these results indicate that venus is indeed a planet with persistent geological activity, intermediate between that of earth’s ocean basins (which are younger and more active) and that of its continents (which are older and less active). almost all of the large craters on venus look fresh, with little degradation or filling in by either lava or windblown dust. this is one way we know that the rates of erosion or sediment deposition are very low. we have the impression that relatively little has happened since the venusian plains were last resurfaced by large- scale volcanic activity. apparently venus experienced some sort of planet-wide volcanic convulsion between 300 and 600 million years ago, a mysterious event that is unlike anything in terrestrial history. volcanoes on venus like earth, venus is a planet that has experienced widespread volcanism. in the lowland plains, volcanic eruptions are the principal way the surface is renewed, with large flows of highly fluid lava destroying old craters and generating a fresh surface.
in addition, numerous younger volcanic mountains and other structures are associated with surface hot spots—places where convection in the planet’s mantle transports the interior heat to the surface. the largest individual volcano on venus, called sif mons, is about 500 kilometers across and 3 kilometers high—broader but lower than the hawaiian volcano mauna loa. at its top is a volcanic crater, or caldera, about 40 kilometers across, and its slopes show individual lava flows up to 500 kilometers long. thousands of smaller volcanoes dot the surface, down to the limit of visibility of the magellan images, which correspond to cones or domes about the size of a shopping mall parking lot. most of these seem similar to terrestrial volcanoes. other volcanoes have unusual shapes, such as the “pancake domes” illustrated in figure 10.8. figure 10.8 pancake-shaped volcanoes on venus. these remarkable circular domes, each about 25 kilometers across and about 2 kilometers tall, are the result of eruptions of highly viscous (sludgy) lava that spreads out evenly in all directions.