the blue color seen at the edges of some of the clouds is produced by small particles of dust that scatter the light from the hot stars. dust can also be seen silhouetted against the glowing gas. (credit: nasa,esa, m. robberto (space telescope science institute/esa) and the hubble space telescope orion treasury project team) hot stars are able to heat nearby gas to temperatures close to 10,000 k. the ultraviolet radiation from the stars also ionizes the hydrogen (remember that during ionization, the electron is stripped completely away from the proton). such a detached proton won’t remain alone forever when attractive electrons are around; it will capture a free electron, becoming a neutral hydrogen once more. however, such a neutral atom can then absorb ultraviolet radiation again and start the cycle over. at a typical moment, most of the atoms near a hot star are in the ionized state. since hydrogen is the main constituent of interstellar gas, we often characterize a region of space according to whether its hydrogen is neutral or ionized. a cloud of ionized hydrogen is called an h ii region.
(scientists who work with spectra use the roman numeral i to indicate that an atom is neutral; successively higher roman numerals are used for each higher stage of ionization. h ii thus refers to hydrogen that has lost its one electron; fe iii is iron with two electrons missing.) the electrons that are captured by the hydrogen nuclei cascade down through the various energy levels of the hydrogen atoms on their way to the lowest level, or ground state. during each transition downward, they give up energy in the form of light. the process of converting ultraviolet radiation into visible light is called fluorescence. interstellar gas contains other elements besides hydrogen. many of them are also ionized in the vicinity of hot stars; they then capture electrons and emit light, just as hydrogen does, allowing them to be observed by astronomers. but generally, the red hydrogen line is the strongest, and that is why h ii regions look red. a fluorescent light on earth works using the same principles as a fluorescent h ii region. when you turn on the current, electrons collide with atoms of mercury vapor in the tube. the mercury is excited to a high-energy state because of these collisions.
when the electrons in the mercury atoms return to lower-energy levels, some of the energy they emit is in the form of ultraviolet photons. these, in turn, strike a phosphor-coated screen on the inner wall of the light tube. the atoms in the screen absorb the ultraviolet photons and emit visible light as they cascade downward among the energy levels. (the difference is that these atoms give off a wider range of light colors, which mix to give the characteristic white glow of fluorescent lights, whereas the hydrogen atoms in an h ii region give off a more limited set of colors.) neutral hydrogen clouds the very hot stars required to produce h ii regions are rare, and only a small fraction of interstellar matter is close enough to such hot stars to be ionized by them. most of the volume of the interstellar medium is filled with neutral (nonionized) hydrogen. how do we go about looking for it? unfortunately, neutral hydrogen atoms at temperatures typical of the gas in interstellar space neither emit nor absorb light in the visible part of the spectrum. nor, for the most part, do the other trace elements that are mixed with the interstellar hydrogen. however, some of these other elements can absorb visible light even at typical interstellar temperatures.
this means that when we observe a bright source such as a hot star or a galaxy, we can sometimes see additional lines in its spectrum produced when interstellar gas absorbs light at particular frequencies (see figure 20.4). some of the strongest interstellar absorption lines are produced by calcium and sodium, but many other elements can be detected as well in sufficiently sensitive observations (as discussed in radiation and spectra). 672 20 • between the stars: gas and dust in space access for free at openstax.org figure 20.4 absorption lines though an interstellar dust cloud. when there is a significant amount of cool interstellar matter (gas with some dust) between us and a star, we can see the absorption lines of the gas in the star’s spectrum. we can distinguish the two kinds of lines because, whereas the star’s lines are broad, the lines from the gas are narrower. the first evidence for absorption by interstellar clouds came from the analysis of a spectroscopic binary star (see the stars: a celestial census), published in 1904.