one technique involves the analysis of tiny changes in the motion of small regions at the sun’s surface. the other relies on the measurement of the neutrinos emitted by the sun. solar pulsations astronomers discovered that the sun pulsates—that is, it alternately expands and contracts—just as your chest expands and contracts as you breathe. this pulsation is very slight, but it can be detected by measuring the radial velocity of the solar surface—the speed with which it moves toward or away from us. the velocities of small regions on the sun are observed to change in a regular way, first toward earth, then away, then toward, and so on. it is as if the sun were “breathing” through thousands of individual lungs, each having a size in the range of 4000 to 15,000 kilometers, each fluctuating back and forth (figure 16.17). figure 16.17 oscillations in the sun. new observational techniques permit astronomers to measure small differences in velocity at the sun’s surface to infer what the deep solar interior is like. in this computer simulation, red shows surface regions that are moving away from the observer (inward motion); blue marks regions moving toward the observer (outward motion).
note that the velocity changes penetrate deep into the sun’s interior. (credit: modification of work by gong, noao) the typical velocity of one of the oscillating regions on the sun is only a few hundred meters per second, and it takes about 5 minutes to complete a full cycle from maximum to minimum velocity and back again. the change in the size of the sun measured at any given point is no more than a few kilometers. the remarkable thing is that these small velocity variations can be used to determine what the interior of the sun is like. the motion of the sun’s surface is caused by waves that reach it from deep in the interior. study of the amplitude and cycle length of velocity changes provides information about the temperature, density, and composition of the layers through which the waves passed before they reached the surface. the situation is somewhat analogous to the use of seismic waves generated by earthquakes to infer the properties of earth’s interior. for this reason, studies of solar oscillations (back-and-forth motions) are referred to as helioseismology. it takes a little over an hour for waves to traverse the sun from center to surface, so the waves, like neutrinos, provide information about what the solar interior is like at the present time.
in contrast, remember that the sunlight we see today emerging from the sun was actually generated in the core several hundred thousand years ago. 562 16 • the sun: a nuclear powerhouse access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page580_img1.jpeg] helioseismology has shown that convection extends inward from the surface 30% of the way toward the center; we have used this information in drawing figure 16.15. pulsation measurements also show that the differential rotation that we see at the sun’s surface, with the fastest rotation occurring at the equator, persists down through the convection zone. below the convection zone, however, the sun, even though it is gaseous throughout, rotates as if it were a solid body like a bowling ball. another finding from helioseismology is that the abundance of helium inside the sun, except in the center where nuclear reactions have converted hydrogen into helium, is about the same as at its surface. that result is important to astronomers because it means we are correct when we use the abundance of the elements measured in the solar atmosphere to construct models of the solar interior.
helioseismology also allows scientists to look beneath a sunspot and see how it works. in the sun: a garden- variety star, we said that sunspots are cool because strong magnetic fields block the outward flow of energy. figure 16.18 shows how gas moves around underneath a sunspot. cool material from the sunspot flows downward, and material surrounding the sunspot is pulled inward, carrying magnetic field with it and thus maintaining the strong field that is necessary to form a sunspot. as the new material enters the sunspot region, it too cools, becomes denser, and sinks, thus setting up a self-perpetuating cycle that can last for weeks. figure 16.18 sunspot structure. this drawing shows our new understanding, from helioseismology, of what lies beneath a sunspot. the black arrows show the direction of the flow of material. the intense magnetic field associated with the sunspot stops the upward flow of hot material and creates a kind of plug that blocks the hot gas. as the material above the plug cools (shown in blue), it becomes denser and plunges inward, drawing more gas and more magnetic field behind it into the spot.