this computer simulation shows the empty lane and spiral density waves that result as a giant planet is forming within the disk. the planet is not shown to scale. (credit a: modification of work by alma (eso/naoj/nrao); credit b: modification of work by nasa/esa and a. feild (stsci)) our figure shows hl tau, a one-million-year-old “newborn” star in the taurus star-forming region. the star is embedded in a shroud of dust and gas that obscures our visible-light view of a circumstellar disk around the star. in 2014 astronomers obtained a dramatic view of the hl tau circumstellar disk using millimeter waves, which pierce the cocoon of dust around the star, showing dust lanes being carved out by several newly formed protoplanets. as the mass of the protoplanets increases, they travel in their orbits at speeds that are faster than the dust and gas in the circumstellar disk. as the protoplanets plow through the disk, their gravitational reach begins to exceed their cross-sectional area, and they become very efficient at sweeping up material and growing until they clear a gap in the disk.
the image of figure 14.15 shows us that a number of protoplanets are forming in the disk and that they were able to form faster than our earlier ideas had suggested—all in the first million years of star formation. for an explanation of alma’s ground-breaking observations of hl tau and what they reveal about planet formation, watch this videocast (https://openstax.org/l/30eusoobhltavid) from the european southern observatory. discovering exoplanets you might think that with the advanced telescopes and detectors astronomers have today, they could directly image planets around nearby stars (which we call exoplanets). this has proved extremely difficult, however, link to learning 14.4 • comparison with other planetary systems 493 [image: astronomy_openstax_page511_img1.jpeg] not only because the exoplanets are faint, but also because they are generally lost in the brilliant glare of the star they orbit. as we discuss in more detail in the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system, the detection techniques that work best are indirect: they observe the effects of the planet on the star it orbits, rather than seeing the planet itself.
the first technique that yielded many planet detections is very high-resolution stellar spectroscopy. the doppler effect lets astronomers measure the star’s radial velocity: that is, the speed of the star, toward us or away from us, relative to the observer. if there is a massive planet in orbit around the star, the gravity of the planet causes the star to wobble, changing its radial velocity by a small but detectable amount. the distance of the star does not matter, as long as it is bright enough for us to take very high quality spectra. measurements of the variation in the star’s radial velocity as the planet goes around the star can tell us the mass and orbital period of the planet. if there are several planets present, their effects on the radial velocity can be disentangled, so the entire planetary system can be deciphered—as long as the planets are massive enough to produce a measureable doppler effect. this detection technique is most sensitive to large planets orbiting close to the star, since these produce the greatest wobble in their stars. it has been used on large ground-based telescopes to detect hundreds of planets, including one around proxima centauri, the nearest star to the sun.
the second indirect technique is based on the slight dimming of a star when one of its planets transits, or crosses over the face of the star, as seen from earth. astronomers do not see the planet, but only detect its presence from careful measurements of a change in the brightness of the star over long periods of time. if the slight dips in brightness repeat at regular intervals, we can determine the orbital period of the planet. from the amount of starlight obscured, we can measure the planet’s size. while some transits have been measured from earth, large-scale application of this transit technique requires a telescope in space, above the atmosphere and its distortions of the star images. it has been most successfully applied from the nasa kepler space observatory, which was built for the sole purpose of “staring” for 5 years at a single part of the sky, continuously monitoring the light from more than 150,000 stars. the primary goal of kepler was to determine the frequency of occurrence of exoplanets of different sizes around different classes of stars. like the doppler technique, the transit observations favor discovery of large planets and short-period orbits.