during its formation from molten rock, the spinning earth became somewhat thicker at the equator, and slightly flattened at the poles (the earth is now described as an oblate spheroid). the moon’s gravity tugs a bit more strongly on the thickened [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page450_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page450_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 451 figure 494: herschel telescope drawing by andrew bell and colin macfarquhar equator than on other parts of the globe, and that added force causes a slight wobble in the earth’s axis. for those astronomers seeking finally to observe stellar parallax, bradley’s discoveries of aberration and nutation were added to precession and atmospheric distortions, making the job even trickier than before. stellar parallax would have to be teased out of a series of wobbles – a wobble within a wobble. for bradley, though, these discoveries elevated him to the highest ranks of european astronomers, where he was named england’s astronomer royal after the death of edmond halley in1742.
william herschel (1738-1822) born friedrich wilhelm herschel in hanover, germany, herschel anglicized his name shortly after his arrival in bath, england, in 1757. he was employed as a musician and conductor, but early on became obsessed with astronomy and building telescopes. initially he built refractor telescopes, but was disappointed with problems endemic to all refractors of that era, chromatic aberration and the very long telescope tubes used to minimize its effects. so he switched to building reflector telescopes. like isaac newton, herschel made the objective mirrors of his telescopes out of metal. soon after bringing his sister, caroline, from hanover to be his assistant, in 1772, he produced a 5” mirror made of an amalgam of copper, tin, and antimony (called speculum). so pleased was he with this first attempt, he began a building craze that filled every room of their cottage with mirror blanks, grinding and shaping tools, and all the other materials and apparatus needed for telescope construction.
between 1773 and 1795, herschel built and polished 430 telescope mirrors, ranging in size from the 5” model he started with, up to two mirrors each weighing one ton and with diameters of four feet. a telescope with a 4-foot mirror required a tube 40 feet long, and also required several people to operate (note the circular track, the pulleys, the movable observing platform just under the nose of the telescope). he also found it difficult to keep them polished, and the heavy mirrors tended to deform under their own weight. he much preferred a telescope he made that had a 19” mirror and a 20-foot tube. he spent hundreds of nights systematically “sweeping” the sky, calling out his observations for caroline to record. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page451_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 452 figure 495: stellar nebula drawing by nasa on the evening of march 13, 1781, herschel recorded what he at first thought was a comet. but over the next few weeks he determined that the object did not move like a comet, finally concluding that the new object must be a new planet.
he had discovered uranus. he became instantly famous, receiving numerous awards and recognition from professional astronomers all over europe. he went on to discover two moons of uranus (oberon and titania), as well as two moons of saturn (mimas and enceledus). while working on methods for observing sunspots, he found that using a red filter produced a lot of heat; this suggested that something interesting was happening at the red end of the solar spectrum: infrared light, which raised the temperature of a thermometer placed just beyond the red end of the visible spectrum. he was the first to measure the axial tilt of mars, and the first to conclude that the solar system itself is moving through space. william herschel’s legacy is a rich one. he initiated what later historians have called “aperture fever,” where sheer size of telescope objectives became a goal in itself. he issued three catalogs of stars and other objects, which were supplemented by observations made by caroline and, later, his son john. when these were supplemented some years later by john dreyer in 1888, it was called the new general catalog of 7840 deep sky objects. the ngc numbering system is still in use today.