toward the scientific revolution historians of science have described the era in western thought that marked the transition from medieval to modern thought as the scientific revolution. a major component of that era was the revolution in astronomy pioneered by nicolaus copernicus, tycho brahe, galileo galilei, johannes kepler, and isaac newton, in the 16th and 17th centuries ce. but some mention needs to be made of the period from claudius ptolemy in the 2nd century until the 16th century. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page427_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 428 figure 468: ulugh beg's observatory in samarkand photo by igor pinigin though ptolemy worked in alexandria and wrote in greek, the entire mediterranean and much of the near east, including egypt, were under the rule of the latin-speaking roman empire. when ptolemy produced the syntaxis, about 150 ce, rome was at its peak. but, in general, educated romans did not pursue scientific subjects, though a few notable exceptions can be found.
status and rewards went instead to those activities that served the state, like engineering aqueducts, road building, and the design and construction of monumental architecture. some romans did value greek contributions in philosophy, but most romans valued practical activities, and were a bit suspicious of the foreign ideas of a conquered people. as the pressures of holding together a far-flung empire began to be felt by the 4th century ce, the emperor constantine removed the capital from rome to constantinople (modern-day istanbul, turkey) to defend the eastern, greek-speaking and wealth-generating, half of the empire from northern invaders. the result was the eventual complete split between the eastern and western halves by the 6th century ce. the eastern half would continue to flourish until the 15th century. but the western, latin-speaking half, entered that cultural nadir usually referred to as the dark ages. in the east, the byzantine empire, which included alexandria, retained much of the greek legacy. but as in the west, scholars were discouraged on religious grounds from pursuing and contributing to greek science. the history of the period after constantine is rife with religious conflict.
the last non-christian philosopher at alexandria, the great mathematician and neo-platonic philosopher hypatia, was killed by a christian mob early in the 5th century ce. thereafter, alexandria’s reputation as a center of learning declined quickly. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page428_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 429 figure 469: arabic astronomy public domain figure 470: arabic tables public domain one of the results of all this unrest was that some groups migrated to more peaceful locales, sometimes at their own choosing, sometimes because of religious persecution. scholars who migrated sometimes took philosophical works with them as they moved east into syria and persia, and then translated them from greek into syriac. after the rise of islam and its rapid spread throughout the near east, north africa, and andalusia (modern-day spain) from the 7th century onward, these same works were translated from syriac into arabic. the arabic-speaking culture that arose in these centuries greatly valued intellectual contributions they gleaned first from india and persia, and later from the greeks.
so impressed were they with ptolemy’s syntaxis, for example, that they renamed it the almagest (“the greatest”). the almagest was greatly improved by arab scholars. they had observatories of their own, so they were able to update ptolemy’s models with newer data (note the scale of the observatory in samarkand). and they introduced the modern decimal system of arithmetic, greatly improving the ease and speed of mathematical calculations (try dividing two numbers using roman numerals some time). this diagram is an arabic rendering of the motion of the planet mercury from a 14th century ce work now in the bodleian library in oxford, england. there is still much historical research needed to account for arabic astronomy on its own terms, rather than just as a conduit for the latin west. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page429_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page429_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 430 but this improved version of ptolemy’s astronomy was eventually passed on to the west beginning in the 12th century ce and thereafter.