link to learning 9.5 • mercury 313 key terms highlands the lighter, heavily cratered regions of the moon, which are generally several kilometers higher than the maria mare (plural: maria) latin for “sea;” the name applied to the dark, relatively smooth features that cover 17% of the moon’s surface summary 9.1 general properties of the moon most of what we know about the moon derives from the apollo program, including 400 kilograms of lunar samples still being intensively studied. the moon has one-eightieth the mass of earth and is severely depleted in both metals and volatile materials. it is made almost entirely of silicates like those in earth’s mantle and crust. however, more recent spacecraft have found evidence of a small amount of water near the lunar poles, most likely deposited by comet and asteroid impacts. 9.2 the lunar surface the moon, like earth, was formed about 4.5 billion years ago. the moon’s heavily cratered highlands are made of rocks more than 4 billion years old. the darker volcanic plains of the maria were erupted primarily between 3.3 and 3.8 billion years ago.
generally, the surface is dominated by impacts, including continuing small impacts that produce its fine-grained soil. 9.3 impact craters a century ago, grove gilbert suggested that the lunar craters were caused by impacts, but the cratering process was not well understood until more recently. high-speed impacts produce explosions and excavate craters 10 to 15 times the size of the impactor with raised rims, ejecta blankets, and often central peaks. cratering rates have been roughly constant for the past 3 billion years but earlier were much greater. crater counts can be used to derive approximate ages for geological features on the moon and other worlds with solid surfaces. 9.4 the origin of the moon the three standard hypotheses for the origin of the moon were the fission hypothesis, the sister hypothesis, and the capture hypothesis. all have problems, and they have been supplanted by the giant impact hypothesis, which ascribes the origin of the moon to the impact of a mars-sized projectile with earth 4.5 billion years ago. the debris from the impact made a ring around earth which condensed and formed the moon. 9.5 mercury mercury is the nearest planet to the sun and the fastest moving.
mercury is similar to the moon in having a heavily cratered surface and no atmosphere, but it differs in having a very large metal core. early in its evolution, it apparently lost part of its silicate mantle, probably due to one or more giant impacts. long scarps on its surface testify to a global compression of mercury’s crust during the past 4 billion years. for further exploration articles the moon barbuzano, j. “the moon mess.” sky & telescope (august 2018): 26. on figuring out the details of the giant impact hypothesis for the moon’s origin. beatty, j. “nasa slams the moon.” sky & telescope (february 2010): 28. the impact of the lcross mission on the moon and what we learned from it. 314 9 • key terms access for free at openstax.org bell, t. “warning: dust ahead.” astronomy (march 2006): 46. what we know about lunar dust and the problems it can cause. canup, r. “the moon’s violent origin.” astronomy (november 2019): 44. on the giant impact hypothesis. cokinos, c.
“looking for ice in the dark.” sky & telescope (january 2021): 34. missions to search for water ice in shadowed craters on the moon. dorminey, b. “secrets beneath the moon’s surface.” astronomy (march 2011): 24. a nice timeline of the moon’s evolution and the story of how we are finding out more about its internal structure. eicher, d. “michael collins remembers apollo 11.” astronomy (july 2019): 24. interview with the astronaut, followed by summary of and images from the first moon-landing mission. evans, b. “the moon’s farside unveiled.” astronomy (october 2020): 24. luna 3 and modern views of the side of the moon facing away from us. shirao, m. “kayuga’s high def highlights.” sky & telescope (february 2010): 20. results from the japanese mission to the moon, with high-definition tv cameras. shubinski, r. “mapping the moon.” astronomy (june 2022): 40. the history of mapping our satellite from the first telescopes through today.