in the past few decades, new technology has enabled us to answer that question by revealing more than 5800 exoplanets in over 4300 planetary systems. even before planets were detected, astronomers had predicted that planetary systems were likely to be byproducts of the star-formation process. in this chapter, we look at how interstellar matter is transformed into stars and planets. 21.1 star formation learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: as we begin our exploration of how stars are formed, let’s review some basics about stars discussed in earlier chapters: • stable (main-sequence) stars such as our sun maintain equilibrium by producing energy through nuclear fusion in their cores. the ability to generate energy by fusion defines a star. • each second in the sun, approximately 600 million tons of hydrogen undergo fusion into helium, with about 4 million tons turning into energy in the process. this rate of hydrogen use means that eventually the sun (and all other stars) will run out of central fuel. • stars come with many different masses, ranging from 1/12 solar masses (msun) to roughly 100–200 msun. there are far more low-mass than high-mass stars.
• the most massive main-sequence stars (spectral type o) are also the most luminous and have the highest surface temperature. the lowest-mass stars on the main sequence (spectral type m or l) are the least luminous and the coolest. • a galaxy of stars such as the milky way contains enormous amounts of gas and dust—enough to make billions of stars like the sun. if we want to find stars still in the process of formation, we must look in places that have plenty of the raw material from which stars are assembled. since stars are made of gas, we focus our attention (and our telescopes) on the dense and cold clouds of gas and dust that dot the milky way (see figure 21.1 and figure 21.2).
identify the sometimes-violent processes by which parts of a molecular cloud collapse to produce stars recognize some of the structures seen in images of molecular clouds like the one in orion explain how the environment of a molecular cloud enables the formation of stars describe how advancing waves of star formation cause a molecular cloud to evolve 700 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org figure 21.2 pillars of dust and young stars in the eagle nebula. (a) this hubble space telescope visible-light image of the central regions of the eagle nebula shows huge columns of cool gas (including molecular hydrogen, h2) and dust. these columns or pillars are of higher density than the surrounding regions and have resisted evaporation by the ultraviolet radiation from a cluster of hot stars just beyond the upper-right corner of this image. note that even around the pillars, very few stars are visible because of the background dust. (b) in contrast, the james webb space telescope image on the right shows the same region in near-infrared light. here we penetrate more of the dust and see many more stars, some of them freshly born from the material of the nebula.
(credit a: modification of work by nasa, esa, and the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura); credit b: modification of work by nasa, esa, csa, stsci; j. depasquale, a. koekemoer, a. pagan (stsci)) molecular clouds: stellar nurseries as we saw in between the stars: gas and dust in space, the most massive reservoirs of interstellar matter—and some of the most massive objects in the milky way galaxy—are the giant molecular clouds. these clouds have cold interiors with characteristic temperatures of only 10–20 k; most of their gas atoms are bound into molecules. these clouds turn out to be the birthplaces of most stars in our galaxy. the masses of molecular clouds range from a thousand times the mass of the sun to about 3 million solar masses. molecular clouds have a complex filamentary structure, similar to cirrus clouds in earth’s atmosphere, but much less dense. the molecular cloud filaments can be up to 1000 light-years long. within the clouds are cold, dense regions with typical masses of 50 to 500 times the mass of the sun; we give these regions the highly technical name clumps.