this image compares the size of the e-elt (left) with the four 8-meter telescopes of the european very large telescope (center) and with the colosseum in rome (right). the mirror of the e-elt will be 39 meters in diameter. astronomers are building a new generation of giant telescopes in order to observe very distant galaxies and understand what they were like when they were newly formed and the universe was young. (credit: modification of work by eso) as we shall see later in this chapter, the globular cluster stars probably did not form until the expansion of the universe had been underway for at least a few hundred million years. accordingly, their ages are consistent with the 13.8 billion-year age estimated from the expansion rate. 29.2 a model of the universe learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: let’s now use the results about the expansion of the universe to look at how these ideas might be applied to develop a model for the evolution of the universe as a whole. with this model, astronomers can make predictions about how the universe has evolved so far and what will happen to it in the future.
the expanding universe every model of the universe must include the expansion we observe. another key element of the models is that the cosmological principle (which we discussed in the evolution and distribution of galaxies) is valid: on the large scale, the universe at any given time is the same everywhere (homogeneous and isotropic). as a result, the expansion rate must be the same everywhere during any epoch of cosmic time. if so, we don’t need to think about the entire universe when we think about the expansion, we can just look at any sufficiently large portion of it. (some models for dark energy would allow the expansion rate to be different in different directions, and scientists are designing experiments to test this idea. however, until such evidence is found, we will assume that the cosmological principle applies throughout the universe.) in galaxies, we hinted that when we think of the expansion of the universe, it is more correct to think of space itself stretching rather than of galaxies moving through static space. nevertheless, we have since been discussing the redshifts of galaxies as if they resulted from the motion of the galaxies themselves.
explain how the rate of expansion of the universe affects its evolution describe four possibilities for the evolution of the universe explain what is expanding when we say that the universe is expanding define critical density and the evidence that matter alone in the universe is much smaller than the critical density describe what the observations say about the likely long-term future of the universe 29.2 • a model of the universe 1013 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1031_img1.jpeg] now, however, it is time to finally put such simplistic notions behind us and take a more sophisticated look at the cosmic expansion. recall from our discussion of einstein’s general theory of relativity (in the chapter on black holes and curved spacetime) that space—or, more precisely, spacetime—is not a mere backdrop to the action of the universe, as newton thought. rather, it is an active participant—affected by and in turn affecting the matter and energy in the universe. since the expansion of the universe is the stretching of all spacetime, all points in the universe are stretching together. thus, the expansion began everywhere at once. unfortunately for tourist agencies of the future, there is no location you can visit where the stretching of space began or where we can say that the big bang happened.
to describe just how space stretches, we say the cosmic expansion causes the universe to undergo a uniform change in scale over time. by scale we mean, for example, the distance between two clusters of galaxies. it is customary to represent the scale by the factor r; if r doubles, then the distance between the clusters has doubled. since the universe is expanding at the same rate everywhere, the change in r tells us how much it has expanded (or contracted) at any given time. for a static universe, r would be constant as time passes. in an expanding universe, r increases with time. if it is space that is stretching rather than galaxies moving through space, then why do the galaxies show redshifts in their spectra? when you were young and naïve—a few chapters ago—it was fine to discuss the redshifts of distant galaxies as if they resulted from their motion away from us. but now that you are an older and wiser student of cosmology, this view will simply not do. a more accurate view of the redshifts of galaxies is that the light waves are stretched by the stretching of the space they travel through. think about the light from a remote galaxy. as it moves away from its source, the light has to travel through space.