(hint: think in powers of 2.) 28 • exercises 1003 1004 28 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 29.1 the largest space telescope. this drawing shows the james webb space telescope, which launched in 2021 and began operations in 2022. the silver sunshade shadows the 18-segment mirror and the science instruments, which operate at extremely cold temperatures. the primary mirror is 6.5 meters (21 feet) in diameter. to see distant galaxies whose light has been shifted to long wavelengths, the telescope will carry several instruments for taking infrared images and spectra. (credit: modification of work by nasa) chapter outline 29.1 the age of the universe 29.2 a model of the universe 29.3 the beginning of the universe 29.4 the cosmic microwave background 29.5 what is the universe really made of? 29.6 the inflationary universe 29.7 the anthropic principle thinking ahead in previous chapters, we explored the contents of the universe—planets, stars, and galaxies—and learned about how these objects change with time. but what about the universe as a whole? how old is it?
what did it look like in the beginning? how has it changed since then? what will be its fate? cosmology is the study of the universe as a whole and is the subject of this chapter. the story of observational cosmology really begins in 1929 when edwin hubble published observations of redshifts and distances for a small sample of galaxies and showed the then-revolutionary result that we live in an expanding universe—one which in the past was denser, hotter, and smoother. from this early discovery, astronomers developed many predictions about the origin and evolution of the universe and then tested those predictions with observations. in this chapter, we will describe what we already know about the history of our dynamic universe and highlight some of the mysteries that remain. the big bang 29 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1023_img1.jpeg] 29.1 the age of the universe learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: to explore the history of the universe, we will follow the same path that astronomers followed historically—beginning with studies of the nearby universe and then probing ever-more-distant objects and looking further back in time.
the realization that the universe changes with time came in the 1920s and 1930s when measurements of the redshifts of a large sample of galaxies became available. with hindsight, it is surprising that scientists were so shocked to discover that the universe is expanding. in fact, our theories of gravity demand that the universe must be either expanding or contracting. to show what we mean, let’s begin with a universe of finite size—say a giant ball of a thousand galaxies. all these galaxies attract each other because of their gravity. if they were initially stationary, they would inevitably begin to move closer together and eventually collide. they could avoid this collapse only if for some reason they happened to be moving away from each other at high speeds. in just the same way, only if a rocket is launched at high enough speed can it avoid falling back to earth. the problem of what happens in an infinite universe is harder to solve, but einstein (and others) used his general theory of relativity (which we described in black holes and curved spacetime) to show that even infinite universes cannot be static.
since astronomers at that time did not yet know the universe was expanding (and einstein himself was philosophically unwilling to accept a universe in motion), he changed his equations by introducing an arbitrary new term (we might call it a fudge factor) called the cosmological constant. this constant represented a hypothetical force of repulsion that could balance gravitational attraction on the largest scales and permit galaxies to remain at fixed distances from one another. that way, the universe could remain still. figure 29.2 einstein and hubble. (a) albert einstein is shown in a 1921 photograph. (b) edwin hubble at work in the mt. wilson describe how we estimate the age of the universe explain how changes in the rate of expansion over time affect estimates of the age of the universe describe the evidence that dark energy exists and that the rate of expansion is currently accelerating describe some independent evidence for the age of the universe that is consistent with the age estimate based on the rate of expansion 1006 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1024_img1.jpeg] observatory.