it was primarily because of galileo and his “dangerous” opinions that, in 1616, the church issued a prohibition decree stating that the copernican doctrine was “false and absurd” and not to be held or defended. galileo’s astronomical observations it is not certain who first conceived of the idea of combining two or more pieces of glass to produce an instrument that enlarged images of distant objects, making them appear nearer. the first such “spyglasses” (now called telescopes) that attracted much notice were made in 1608 by the dutch spectacle maker hans lippershey (1570–1619). galileo heard of the discovery and, without ever having seen an assembled telescope, constructed one of his own with a three-power magnification (3×), which made distant objects appear three times nearer and larger (figure 2.20). link to learning 58 2 • observing the sky: the birth of astronomy access for free at openstax.org figure 2.20 telescope used by galileo. the telescope has a wooden tube covered with paper and a lens 26 millimeters across.
on august 25, 1609, galileo demonstrated a telescope with a magnification of 9× to government officials of the city-state of venice. by a magnification of 9×, we mean the linear dimensions of the objects being viewed appeared nine times larger or, alternatively, the objects appeared nine times closer than they really were. there were obvious military advantages associated with a device for seeing distant objects. for his invention, galileo’s salary was nearly doubled, and he was granted lifetime tenure as a professor. (his university colleagues were outraged, particularly because the invention was not even original.) others had used the telescope before galileo to observe things on earth. but in a flash of insight that changed the history of astronomy, galileo realized that he could turn the power of the telescope toward the heavens. before using his telescope for astronomical observations, galileo had to devise a stable mount and improve the optics. he increased the magnification to 30×. galileo also needed to acquire confidence in the telescope. at that time, human eyes were believed to be the final arbiter of truth about size, shape, and color.
lenses, mirrors, and prisms were known to distort distant images by enlarging, reducing, or inverting them, or spreading the light into a spectrum (rainbow of colors). galileo undertook repeated experiments to convince himself that what he saw through the telescope was identical to what he saw up close. only then could he begin to believe that the miraculous phenomena the telescope revealed in the heavens were real. beginning his astronomical work late in 1609, galileo found that many stars too faint to be seen with the unaided eye became visible with his telescope. in particular, he found that some nebulous blurs resolved into many stars, and that the milky way—the strip of whiteness across the night sky—was also made up of a multitude of individual stars. examining the planets, galileo found four moons revolving about jupiter in times ranging from just under 2 days to about 17 days. this discovery was particularly important because it showed that not everything has to revolve around earth. furthermore, it demonstrated that there could be centers of motion that are themselves in motion.
defenders of the geocentric view had argued that if earth was in motion, then the moon would be left behind because it could hardly keep up with a rapidly moving planet. yet, here were jupiter’s moons doing exactly that. (to recognize this discovery and honor his work, nasa named a spacecraft that explored the jupiter system galileo.) with his telescope, galileo was able to carry out the test of the copernican theory mentioned earlier, based on the phases of venus. within a few months, he had found that venus goes through phases like the moon, showing that it must revolve about the sun, so that we see different parts of its daylight side at different times (see figure 2.18.) these observations could not be reconciled with ptolemy’s model, in which venus circled about earth. in ptolemy’s model, venus could also show phases, but they were the wrong phases in the wrong order from what galileo observed. galileo also observed the moon and saw craters, mountain ranges, valleys, and flat, dark areas that he thought might be water.