46 2 • observing the sky: the birth of astronomy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page64_img1.jpeg] hipparchus and precession perhaps the greatest astronomer of antiquity was hipparchus, born in nicaea in what is present-day turkey. he erected an observatory on the island of rhodes around 150 bce, when the roman republic was expanding its influence throughout the mediterranean region. there he measured, as accurately as possible, the positions of objects in the sky, compiling a pioneering star catalog with about 850 entries. he designated celestial coordinates for each star, specifying its position in the sky, just as we specify the position of a point on earth by giving its latitude and longitude. he also divided the stars into apparent magnitudes according to their apparent brightness. he called the brightest ones “stars of the first magnitude”; the next brightest group, “stars of the second magnitude”; and so forth. this rather arbitrary system, in modified form, still remains in use today (although it is less and less useful for professional astronomers).
by observing the stars and comparing his data with older observations, hipparchus made one of his most remarkable discoveries: the position in the sky of the north celestial pole had altered over the previous century and a half. hipparchus deduced correctly that this had happened not only during the period covered by his observations, but was in fact happening all the time: the direction around which the sky appears to rotate changes slowly but continuously. recall from the section on celestial poles and the celestial equator that the north celestial pole is just the projection of earth’s north pole into the sky. if the north celestial pole is wobbling around, then earth itself must be doing the wobbling. today, we understand that the direction in which earth’s axis points does indeed change slowly but regularly—a motion we call precession. if you have ever watched a spinning top wobble, you observed a similar kind of motion. the top’s axis describes a path in the shape of a cone, as earth’s gravity tries to topple it (figure 2.12). figure 2.12 precession. just as the axis of a rapidly spinning top wobbles slowly in a circle, so the axis of earth wobbles in a 26,000-year cycle.
today the north celestial pole is near the star polaris, but about 5000 years ago it was close to a star called thuban, and in 14,000 years it will be closest to the star vega. because our planet is not an exact sphere, but bulges a bit at the equator, the pulls of the sun and moon cause it to wobble like a top. it takes about 26,000 years for earth’s axis to complete one circle of precession. as a result of this motion, the point where our axis points in the sky changes as time goes on. while polaris is the star closest to the north celestial pole today (it will reach its closest point around the year 2100), the star vega in the constellation of lyra will be the north star in 14,000 years. 2.2 • ancient astronomy 47 [image: astronomy_openstax_page65_img1.jpeg] ptolemy’s model of the solar system the last great astronomer of the roman era was claudius ptolemy (or ptolemaeus), who flourished in alexandria in about the year 140.
he wrote a mammoth compilation of astronomical knowledge, which today is called by its arabic name, almagest (meaning “the greatest”). almagest does not deal exclusively with ptolemy’s own work; it includes a discussion of the astronomical achievements of the past, principally those of hipparchus. today, it is our main source of information about the work of hipparchus and other greek astronomers. ptolemy’s most important contribution was a geometric representation of the solar system that predicted the positions of the planets for any desired date and time. hipparchus, not having enough data on hand to solve the problem himself, had instead amassed observational material for posterity to use. ptolemy supplemented this material with new observations of his own and produced a cosmological model that endured more than a thousand years, until the time of copernicus. the complicating factor in explaining the motions of the planets is that their apparent wandering in the sky results from the combination of their own motions with earth’s orbital revolution. as we watch the planets from our vantage point on the moving earth, it is a little like watching a car race while you are competing in it.