in fact, it turns out that most of the stars visible without a telescope are hundreds of light- years away and many times more luminous than the sun. among the 9000 stars visible to the unaided eye, only about 50 are intrinsically fainter than the sun. note also that several of the stars in appendix j are spectral type b, a type that is completely missing from table 18.1. the most luminous of the bright stars listed in appendix j emit more than 50,000 times more energy than does the sun. these highly luminous stars are missing from the solar neighborhood because they are very rare. none of them happens to be in the tiny volume of space immediately surrounding the sun, and only this small volume was surveyed to get the data shown in table 18.1. for example, let’s consider the most luminous stars—those 100 or more times as luminous as the sun. although such stars are rare, they are visible to the unaided eye, even when hundreds to thousands of light- years away. a star with a luminosity 10,000 times greater than that of the sun can be seen without a telescope out to a distance of 5000 light-years.
the volume of space included within a distance of 5000 light-years, however, is enormous; so even though highly luminous stars are intrinsically rare, many of them are readily visible to our unaided eye. the contrast between these two samples of stars, those that are close to us and those that can be seen with the unaided eye, is an example of a selection effect. when a population of objects (stars in this example) includes a great variety of different types, we must be careful what conclusions we draw from an examination of any particular subgroup. certainly we would be fooling ourselves if we assumed that the stars visible to the unaided eye are characteristic of the general stellar population; this subgroup is heavily weighted to the most luminous stars. it requires much more effort to assemble a complete data set for the nearest stars, since most are so faint that they can be observed only with a telescope. however, it is only by doing so that astronomers are able to know about the properties of the vast majority of the stars, which are actually much smaller and fainter than our own sun. in the next section, we will look at how we measure some of these properties.
606 18 • the stars: a celestial census access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page624_img1.jpeg] 18.2 measuring stellar masses learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the mass of a star—how much material it contains—is one of its most important characteristics. if we know a star’s mass, as we shall see, we can estimate how long it will shine and what its ultimate fate will be. yet the mass of a star is very difficult to measure directly. somehow, we need to put a star on the cosmic equivalent of a scale. luckily, not all stars live like the sun, in isolation from other stars. about half the stars are binary stars—two stars that orbit each other, bound together by gravity. masses of binary stars can be calculated from measurements of their orbits, just as the mass of the sun can be derived by measuring the orbits of the planets around it (see orbits and gravity). binary stars before we discuss in more detail how mass can be measured, we will take a closer look at stars that come in pairs.
the first binary star was discovered in 1650, less than half a century after galileo began to observe the sky with a telescope. giovanni battista riccioli (1598–1671), an italian astronomer, noted that the star mizar, in the middle of the big dipper’s handle, appeared through his telescope as two stars. since that discovery, thousands of binary stars have been cataloged. (astronomers call any pair of stars that appear to be close to each other in the sky double stars, but not all of these form a true binary, that is, not all of them are physically associated. some are just chance alignments of stars that are actually at different distances from us.) although stars most commonly come in pairs, there are also triple and quadruple systems. one well-known binary star is castor, located in the constellation of gemini. by 1804, astronomer william herschel, who also discovered the planet uranus, had noted that the fainter component of castor had slightly changed its position relative to the brighter component. (we use the term “component” to mean a member of a star system.) here was evidence that one star was moving around another.