gradually, the partial phases of the eclipse repeat themselves, in reverse order, until the moon has completely uncovered the sun. we should make one important safety point here: while the few minutes of the total eclipse are safe to look at, if any part of the sun is uncovered, you must protect your eyes with safe eclipse glasses2 or by projecting an image of the sun (instead of looking at it directly). for more, read the how to observe solar eclipses box in this chapter. eclipses of the moon a lunar eclipse occurs when the moon enters the shadow of earth. the geometry of a lunar eclipse is shown in figure 4.24. earth’s dark shadow is about 1.4 million kilometers long, so at the moon’s distance (an average of 384,000 kilometers), it could cover about four full moons. unlike a solar eclipse, which is visible only in certain local areas on earth, a lunar eclipse is visible to everyone who can see the moon. because a lunar eclipse can be seen (weather permitting) from the entire night side of earth, lunar eclipses are observed far more frequently from a given place on earth than are solar eclipses.
2 eclipse glasses are available in many planetarium and observatory gift stores, and also from the two main u.s. manufacturers: american paper optics and rainbow symphony. 128 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page146_img1.jpeg] figure 4.24 geometry of a lunar eclipse. the moon is shown moving through the different parts of earth’s shadow during a total lunar eclipse. note that the distance the moon moves in its orbit during the eclipse has been exaggerated here for clarity. an eclipse of the moon is total only if the moon’s path carries it though earth’s umbra. if the moon does not enter the umbra completely, we have a partial eclipse of the moon. but because earth is larger than the moon, its umbra is larger, so that lunar eclipses last longer than solar eclipses, as we will discuss below. a lunar eclipse can take place only when the sun, earth, and moon are in a line. the moon is opposite the sun, which means the moon will be in full phase before the eclipse, making the darkening even more dramatic.
about 20 minutes before the moon reaches the dark shadow, it dims somewhat as earth partly blocks the sunlight. as the moon begins to dip into the shadow, the curved shape of earth’s shadow upon it soon becomes apparent. even when totally eclipsed, the moon is still faintly visible, usually appearing a dull coppery red. the illumination on the eclipsed moon is sunlight that has been bent into earth’s shadow by passing through earth’s atmosphere. after totality, the moon moves out of the shadow and the sequence of events is reversed. the total duration of the eclipse depends on how closely the moon’s path approaches the axis of the shadow. for an eclipse where the moon goes through the center of earth’s shadow, each partial phase consumes at least 1 hour, and totality can last as long as 1 hour and 40 minutes. eclipses of the moon are much more “democratic” than solar eclipses. since the full moon is visible on the entire night side of earth, the lunar eclipse is visible for all those who live in that hemisphere.
(recall that a total eclipse of the sun is visible only in a narrow path where the shadow of the umbra falls.) total eclipses of the moon occur, on average, about once every two or three years. a list of future total eclipses of the moon is in appendix h. in addition, since the lunar eclipse happens to a full moon, and a full moon is not dangerous to look at, everyone can look at the moon during all the parts of the eclipse without worrying about safety. thanks to our understanding of gravity and motion (see orbits and gravity), eclipses can now be predicted centuries in advance. we’ve come a long way since humanity stood frightened by the darkening of the sun or the moon, fearing the displeasure of the gods. today, we enjoy the sky show with a healthy appreciation of the majestic forces that keep our solar system running. use the solar and lunar eclipse simulation (https://openstax.org/l/30solueclips) to explore the conditions of solar and lunar eclipses yourself.