the galileo camera revealed both as long and highly irregular (resembling a battered potato), as befits fragments from a catastrophic collision (figure 13.5). figure 13.5 mathilde, gaspra, and ida. the first three asteroids photographed from spacecraft flybys, printed to the same scale. gaspra and ida are s-type and were investigated by the galileo spacecraft; mathilde is c-type and was a flyby target for the near- 440 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page458_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page458_img2.jpeg] shoemaker spacecraft. (credit: modification of work by near project, galileo project, nasa) the detailed images allowed us to count the craters on gaspra and ida, and to estimate the length of time their surfaces have been exposed to collisions. the galileo scientists concluded that these asteroids are only about 200 million years old (that is, the collisions that formed them took place about 200 million years ago).
calculations suggest that an asteroid the size of gaspra or ida can expect another catastrophic collision sometime in the next billion years, at which time it will be disrupted to form another generation of still-smaller fragments. the greatest surprise of the galileo flyby of ida was the discovery of a moon (which was then named dactyl), in orbit about the asteroid (figure 13.6). although only 1.5 kilometers in diameter, smaller than many college campuses, dactyl provides scientists with something otherwise beyond their reach—a measurement of the mass and density of ida using kepler’s laws. the moon’s distance of about 100 kilometers and its orbital period of about 24 hours indicate that ida has a density of approximately 2.5 g/cm3, which matches the density of primitive rocks. subsequently, both large visible-light telescopes and high-powered planetary radar have discovered many other asteroid moons, so that we are now able to accumulate valuable data on asteroid masses and densities. figure 13.6 ida and dactyl. the asteroid ida and its tiny moon dactyl (the small body off to its right), were photographed by the galileo spacecraft in 1993.
irregularly shaped ida is 56 kilometers in its longest dimension, while dactyl is about 1.5 kilometers across. the colors have been intensified in this image; to the eye, all asteroids look basically gray. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl) by the way, phobos and deimos, the two small moons of mars, are probably captured asteroids (figure 13.7). they were first studied at close range by the viking orbiters in 1977 and later by mars global surveyor. both are irregular, somewhat elongated, and heavily created, resembling other smaller asteroids. their largest dimensions are about 26 kilometers and 16 kilometers, respectively. the small outer moons of jupiter and saturn were probably also captured asteroids, perhaps early in the history of the solar system. 13.1 • asteroids 441 [image: astronomy_openstax_page459_img1.jpeg] figure 13.7 moons of mars. the two small moons of mars, (a) phobos and (b) deimos, were discovered in 1877 by american astronomer asaph hall.
their surface materials are similar to many of the asteroids in the outer asteroid belt, leading astronomers to believe that the two moons may be captured asteroids. (credit a: modification of work by nasa; credit b: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/university of arizona) beginning in the 1990s, spacecraft have provided close looks at several more asteroids. the near earth asteroid rendezvous (near) spacecraft went into orbit around the s-type asteroid eros, becoming a temporary moon of this asteroid. on its way to eros, the near spacecraft was renamed after planetary geologist eugene shoemaker, a pioneer in our understanding of craters and impacts. for a year, the near-shoemaker spacecraft orbited the little asteroid at various altitudes, measuring its surface and interior composition as well as mapping eros from all sides (figure 13.8). the data showed that eros is made of some of the most chemically primitive materials in the solar system. several other asteroids have been revealed as made of loosely bound rubble throughout, but not eros. its uniform density (about the same as that of earth’s crust) and extensive global-scale grooves and ridges show that it is a cracked but solid rock.