the quasar spectra obtained so far show redshifts ranging from 15% to more than 96% the speed of light. observations with the hubble space telescope show that quasars lie at the centers of galaxies and that both spirals and ellipticals can harbor quasars. the redshifts of the underlying galaxies match the redshifts of the quasars embedded in their centers, thereby proving that quasars obey the hubble law and are at the great distances implied by their redshifts. to be noticeable at such great distances, quasars must have 10 to 100 times the luminosity of the brighter normal galaxies. their variations show that this tremendous energy output is generated in a small volume—in some cases, in a region not much larger than our own solar system. a number of galaxies closer to us also show strong activity at their centers—activity now known to be caused by the same mechanism as the quasars. 27.2 supermassive black holes: what quasars really are both active galactic nuclei and quasars derive their energy from material falling toward, and forming a hot accretion disk around, a massive black hole.
this model can account for the large amount of energy emitted and for the fact that the energy is produced in a relatively small volume of space. it can also explain why jets coming from these objects are seen in two directions: those directions are perpendicular to the accretion disk. 27.3 quasars as probes of evolution in the universe quasars and galaxies affect each other: the galaxy supplies fuel to the black hole, and the quasar heats and disrupts the gas clouds in the galaxy. the balance between these two processes probably helps explain why the black hole seems always to be about 1/200 the mass of the spherical bulge of stars that surrounds the black hole. quasars were much more common billions of years ago than they are now, and astronomers speculate that they mark an early stage in the formation of galaxies. quasars were more likely to be active when the universe was young and fuel for their accretion disk was more available. quasar activity can be re-triggered by a collision between two galaxies, which provides a new source of fuel to feed the black hole. for further exploration articles bartusiak, m. “a beast in the core.” astronomy (july 1998): 42.
on supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies. disney, m. “a new look at quasars.” scientific american (june 1998): 52. djorgovski, s. “fires at cosmic dawn.” astronomy (september 1995): 36. on quasars and what we can learn 950 27 • key terms access for free at openstax.org from them. ford, h., & tsvetanov, z. “massive black holes at the hearts of galaxies.” sky & telescope (june 1996): 28. nice overview. irion, r. “a quasar in every galaxy?” sky & telescope (july 2006): 40. discusses how supermassive black holes powering the centers of galaxies may be more common than thought. kormendy, j. “why are there so many black holes?” astronomy (august 2016): 26. discussion of why supermassive black holes are so common in the universe. kruesi, l. “secrets of the brightest objects in the universe.” astronomy (july 2013): 24.
review of our current understanding of quasars and how they help us learn about black holes. miller, m., et al. “supermassive black holes: shaping their surroundings.” sky & telescope (april 2005): 42. jets from black hole disks. nadis, s. “exploring the galaxy–black hole connection.” astronomy (may 2010): 28. overview. nadis, s. “here, there, and everywhere.” astronomy (february 2001): 34. on hubble observations showing how common supermassive black holes are in galaxies. nadis, s. “peering inside a monster galaxy.” astronomy (may 2014): 24. what x-ray observations tell us about the mechanism that powers the active galaxy m87. olson, s. “black hole hunters.” astronomy (may 1999): 48. profiles four astronomers who search for “hungry” black holes at the centers of active galaxies. peterson, b. “solving the quasar puzzle.” sky & telescope (september 2013): 24. a review article on how we figured out that black holes were the power source for quasars, and how we view them today.