some have been found in the hearts of small galaxies and even larger globular clusters. the mass and size of the central bulge in a galaxy is directly proportional to the mass of the central black hole. structure supermassive black holes are identified by the activities detected in their proximity. there are stars that orbit the black hole in paths and with velocities that indicate the mass of the central object. the central black hole is not visible, but an accretion disk can be seen close to the center. there are often jets of material being emitted from near the center along the magnetic poles. this accretion disk of hot material is surrounded by a torus of dust and gas. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page332_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 333 figure 403: active galaxy spectrum radio infrared visible uv x-ray gamma ray figure 404: core of ngc 4261 component 156 – active galaxies some galaxies generate more energy than normal. they are termed active galaxies and have active galactic nuclei. active galactic nuclei have a spectrum that is quite different from a stellar blackbody curve.
a normal galaxy’s spectrum is the sum of all of its stars and resembles a stellar blackbody curve (blue curve in figure 403). an active galaxy has an active galactic nucleus and displays a very different galactic spectrum (red curve in figure 403). there are three general classifications of active galaxies: quasars, seyfert galaxies and radio galaxies. this increased activity in the galaxy’s core is believed to be due to a high level of material merging with the central black hole during galaxy mergers. as material is pulled apart as it approaches the central black hole, charged particles are ejected from the accretion disk by the strong magnetic fields created by the rotating black hole.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page333_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page333_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 334 figure 405: quasar 3c 273 with jet figure 406: quasar 3c 273's jet figure 407: quasar 3c 273's spectrum component 157 – quasars history quasars (quasi-stellar radio sources) were first discovered by radio telescopes in the 1950s but no correlations with known visible objects were available. quasars contained broad spectral lines that were not associated with any known elements or processes. in 1960, the first quasar was associated with a faint visible light object. the second one was observed during an occultation by the moon in 1962, and in 1963 it was determined that the broad spectral lines observered were hydrogen-alpha spectral lines with a large redshift of 15.8. once this was discovered, then it was possible to identify the many similar objects that had been identified. details quasars are dense cores of interacting proto-galaxies.
the outbursts are from the the merger of the two supermassive black holes. figure 405 show an image from the chandra x-ray telescope showing a jet from the core of quasar 3c 273. figure 406 shows the jet as a combined image from chandra (x-rays in blue) through hubble (visible in green) to spitzer (infrared in red). this shows how the energy of the jet diminishes as it moves away from the quasar. figure 407 shows the spectrum of quasar 3c 273 compared to relatively close star vega. the redshift indicates that the quasar is very far away. the broadening of the emission lines indicates that there is a great deal of turbulance. quasars occurred between 13 and 10 billion years ago, with a peak 12 billion years ago. this is called th quasar epoch.