this image shows the valles marineris canyon complex, which is 3000 kilometers long and 8 kilometers deep. (credit: nasa/jpl/usgs) 340 10 • earthlike planets: venus and mars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page358_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page358_img2.jpeg] an excellent 4-minute video tour (https://openstax.org/l/30vallesmariner) of valles marineris, narrated by planetary scientist phil christensen, is available for viewing. the term “canyon” is somewhat misleading here because the valles marineris canyons have no outlets and were not cut by running water. they are basically tectonic cracks, produced by the same crustal tensions that caused the tharsis uplift. however, water has played a later role in shaping the canyons, primarily by seeping from deep springs and undercutting the cliffs. this undercutting led to landslides that gradually widened the original cracks into the great valleys we see today (figure 10.20). today, the primary form of erosion in the canyons is probably wind.
figure 10.20 martian landslides. this viking orbiter image shows ophir chasma, one of the connected valleys of the valles marineris canyon system. look carefully and you can see enormous landslides whose debris is piled up underneath the cliff wall, which tower up to 10 kilometers above the canyon floor. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl/usgs) while the tharsis bulge and valles marineris are impressive, in general, we see fewer tectonic structures on mars than on venus. in part, this may reflect a lower general level of geological activity, as would be expected for a smaller planet. but it is also possible that evidence of widespread faulting has been buried by wind- deposited sediment over much of mars. like earth, mars may have hidden part of its geological history under a cloak of soil. the view on the martian surface the first spacecraft to land successfully on mars were vikings 1 and 2 and mars pathfinder. all sent back photos that showed a desolate but strangely beautiful landscape, including numerous angular rocks interspersed with dune like deposits of fine-grained, reddish soil (figure 10.21).
link to learning 10.4 • the geology of mars 341 [image: astronomy_openstax_page359_img1.jpeg] figure 10.21 three martian landing sites. the mars landers viking 1 in chryse, pathfinder in ares valley, and viking 2 in utopia, all photographed their immediate surroundings. it is apparent from the similarity of these three photos that each spacecraft touched down on a flat, windswept plain littered with rocks ranging from tiny pebbles up to meter-size boulders. it is probable that most of mars looks like this on the surface. (credit “viking 1”: modification of work by van der hoorn/nasa; credit “pathfinder”: modification of work by nasa; credit “viking 2”: modification of work by nasa; credit mars: modification of work by nasa/goddard space flight center) all three of these landers were targeted to relatively flat, lowland terrain. instruments on the landers found that the soil consisted of clays and iron oxides, as had long been expected from the red color of the planet. all the rocks measured appeared to be of volcanic origin and roughly the same composition.
later landers were targeted to touch down in areas that apparently were flooded sometime in the past, where sedimentary rock layers, formed in the presence of water, are common. (although we should note that nearly all the planet is blanketed in at least a thin layer of wind-blown dust). the viking landers included weather stations that operated for several years, providing a perspective on martian weather. the temperatures they measured varied greatly with the seasons, due to the absence of moderating oceans and clouds. typically, the summer maximum at viking 1 was 240 k (–33 °c), dropping to 190 k (–83 °c) at the same location just before dawn. the lowest air temperatures, measured farther north by viking 2, were about 173 k (–100 °c). during the winter, viking 2 also photographed water frost deposits on the ground (figure 10.22). we make a point of saying “water frost” here because at some locations on mars, it gets cold enough for carbon dioxide (dry ice) to freeze out of the atmosphere as well.