the kepler observations closed down in 2018 when the spacecraft ran out of the fuel needed to point the telescope. however, other space telescopes are now continuing the search. recent detection of exoplanets using both the doppler and transit techniques has been incredibly successful. within two decades, we went from no knowledge of other planetary systems to a catalog of thousands of exoplanets. most of the exoplanets found so far are more massive than or larger in size than earth. it is not that earth analogs do not exist. rather, the shortage of small rocky planets is an observational bias: smaller planets are more difficult to detect. analyses of the data to correct for such biases or selection effects indicate that small planets (like the terrestrial planets in our system) are actually much more common than giant planets. also relatively common are “super earths,” planets with two to ten times the mass of our planet (figure 14.16). we don’t have any of these in our solar system, but nature seems to have no trouble making them elsewhere. overall, the kepler data suggest that perhaps one half of all stars (or more) have exoplanets, implying the existence of at least 100 billion planets in our galaxy alone.
that is a staggering number. 494 14 • cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system access for free at openstax.org figure 14.16 transiting planets by size. this bar graph shows the planets found so far using the transit method (the vast majority found by the kepler mission). the orange parts of each bar indicate the planets announced by the kepler team in may 2016. note that the largest number of planets found so far are in two categories that we don’t have in our own solar system—planets whose size is between earth’s and neptune’s. (credit: modification of work by nasa) the configurations of other planetary systems let’s look more closely at the progress in the detection of exoplanets. figure 14.17 shows the planets that were discovered each year by the two techniques we discussed. in the early years of exoplanet discovery, most of the planets were similar in mass to jupiter. this is because, as mentioned above, the most massive planets were easiest to detect. in more recent years, planets smaller than neptune and even close to the size of earth have been detected. figure 14.17 masses of exoplanets discovered by year.
horizontal lines are drawn to reference the masses of jupiter, saturn, neptune, and earth. the gray dots indicate planets discovered by measuring the radial velocity of the star, and the red dots are for planets that transit their stars. in the early years, the only planets that could be detected were similar in mass to jupiter. improvements in technology and observing strategies enabled the detection of lower mass planets as time went on, and now even smaller worlds are being found. (note that this tally ends in 2014, but the trend should be clear.) 14.4 • comparison with other planetary systems 495 [image: astronomy_openstax_page513_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page513_img2.jpeg] we also know that many exoplanets are in multiplanet systems. this is one characteristic that our solar system shares with exosystems. looking back at figure 14.15 and seeing how such large disks can give rise to more than one center of condensation, it is not too surprising that multiplanet systems are a typical outcome of planet formation. astronomers have tried to measure whether multiple planet systems all lie in the same plane using astrometry.
this is a difficult measurement to make with current technology, but it is an important measurement that could help us understand the origin and evolution of planetary systems. comparison between theory and data many of the planetary systems discovered so far do not resemble our own solar system. consequently, we have had to reassess some aspects of the “standard models” for the formation of planetary systems. science sometimes works in this way, with new data contradicting our expectations. the press often talks about a scientist making experiments to “confirm” a theory. indeed, it is comforting when new data support a hypothesis or theory and increase our confidence in an earlier result. but the most exciting and productive moments in science often come when new data don’t support existing theories, forcing scientists to rethink their position and develop new and deeper insights into the way nature works. nothing about the new planetary systems contradicts the basic idea that planets form from the aggregation (clumping) of material within circumstellar disks. however, the existence of “hot jupiters”—planets of jovian mass that are closer to their stars than the orbit of mercury—poses the biggest problem.