sometimes opponents’ cars pass you, but at other times you pass them, making them appear to move backward for a while with respect to you. figure 2.13 shows the motion of earth and a planet farther from the sun—in this case, mars. earth travels around the sun in the same direction as the other planet and in nearly the same plane, but its orbital speed is faster. as a result, it overtakes the planet periodically, like a faster race car on the inside track. the figure shows where we see the planet in the sky at different times. the path of the planet among the stars is illustrated in the star field on the right side of the figure. figure 2.13 retrograde motion of a planet beyond earth’s orbit. the letters on the diagram show where earth and mars are at different times. by following the lines from each earth position through each corresponding mars position, you can see how the retrograde path of mars looks against the background stars.
48 2 • observing the sky: the birth of astronomy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page66_img1.jpeg] the planetary configurations simulator (https://openstax.org/l/30planetconfig) allows you to see the usual prograde and occasional retrograde motion of other planets. you can switch back and forth between viewing motion from earth and mars (as well as other planets). normally, planets move eastward in the sky over the weeks and months as they orbit the sun, but from positions b to d in figure 2.13, as earth passes the planets in our example, it appears to drift backward, moving west in the sky. even though it is actually moving to the east, the faster-moving earth has overtaken it and seems, from our perspective, to be leaving it behind. as earth rounds its orbit toward position e, the planet again takes up its apparent eastward motion in the sky. the temporary apparent westward motion of a planet as earth swings between it and the sun is called retrograde motion. such backward motion is much easier for us to understand today, now that we know earth is one of the moving planets and not the unmoving center of all creation.
but ptolemy was faced with the far more complex problem of explaining such motion while assuming a stationary earth. furthermore, because the greeks believed that celestial motions had to be circles, ptolemy had to construct his model using circles alone. to do it, he needed dozens of circles, some moving around other circles, in a complex structure that makes a modern viewer dizzy. but we must not let our modern judgment cloud our admiration for ptolemy’s achievement. in his day, a complex universe centered on earth was perfectly reasonable and, in its own way, quite beautiful. however, as alfonso x, the king of castile, was reported to have said after having the ptolemaic system of planet motions explained to him, “if the lord almighty had consulted me before embarking upon creation, i should have recommended something simpler.” ptolemy solved the problem of explaining the observed motions of planets by having each planet revolve in a small orbit called an epicycle. the center of the epicycle then revolved about earth on a circle called a deferent (figure 2.14).
when the planet is at position x in figure 2.14 on the epicycle orbit, it is moving in the same direction as the center of the epicycle; from earth, the planet appears to be moving eastward. when the planet is at y, however, its motion is in the direction opposite to the motion of the epicycle’s center around earth. by choosing the right combination of speeds and distances, ptolemy succeeded in having the planet moving westward at the correct speed and for the correct interval of time, thus replicating retrograde motion with his model. figure 2.14 ptolemy’s complicated cosmological system. each planet orbits around a small circle called an epicycle. each epicycle orbits on a larger circle called the deferent. this system is not centered exactly on earth but on an offset point called the equant. the link to learning 2.2 • ancient astronomy 49 [image: astronomy_openstax_page67_img1.jpeg] greeks needed all this complexity to explain the actual motions in the sky because they believed that earth was stationary and that all sky motions had to be circular.