in the top left illustration, star a is moving toward us, so the line in its spectrum is doppler-shifted toward the blue end of the spectrum. star b is moving away from us, so its line shows a redshift. when we observe the composite spectrum of the two stars, the line appears double. when the two stars are both moving across our line of sight (neither away from nor toward us), they both have the same radial velocity (that of the pair’s center of mass); hence, the spectral lines of the two stars come together. this is shown in the two bottom illustrations in figure 18.6. figure 18.6 motions of two stars orbiting each other and what the spectrum shows. we see changes in velocity because when one star is moving toward earth, the other is moving away; half a cycle later, the situation is reversed. doppler shifts cause the spectral lines to move back and forth. in diagrams 1 and 3, lines from both stars can be seen well separated from each other.
when the two stars are moving perpendicular to our line of sight (that is, they are not moving either toward or away from us), the two lines are exactly superimposed, and so in diagrams 2 and 4, we see only a single spectral line. note that in the diagrams, the orbit of the star pair is tipped slightly with respect to the viewer (or if the viewer were looking at it in the sky, the orbit would be tilted with respect to the viewer’s line of sight). if the orbit were exactly in the plane of the page or screen (or the sky), then it would look nearly circular, but we would see no change in radial velocity (no part of the motion would be toward us or away from us.) if the orbit were perpendicular to the plane of the page or screen, then the stars would appear to move back and forth in a straight line, and we would see the largest-possible radial velocity variations. this diagram has been simplified for clarity. for more realistic situations, see the animation in the following link to learning feature box.
18.2 • measuring stellar masses 609 [image: astronomy_openstax_page627_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page627_img2.jpeg] a plot showing how the velocities of the stars change with time is called a radial velocity curve; the curve for the binary system in figure 18.6 is shown in figure 18.7. figure 18.7 radial velocities in a spectroscopic binary system. these curves plot the radial velocities of two stars in a spectroscopic binary system, showing how the stars alternately approach and recede from earth. note that positive velocity means the star is moving away from us, and negative velocity means the star is moving toward us. the center of mass of the system itself is also moving away from us, indicated by the positive velocity of 40 kilometers per second. the positions on the curve corresponding to the illustrations in figure 18.6 are marked with the diagram number (1–4). masses from the orbits of binary stars we can estimate the masses of binary star systems using newton’s reformulation of kepler’s third law (discussed in newton’s universal law of gravitation).
kepler found that the time a planet takes to go around the sun is related by a specific mathematical formula to its distance from the sun. in our binary star situation, if two objects are in mutual revolution, then the period (p) with which they go around each other is related to the semimajor axis (d) of the orbit of one with respect to the other, according to this equation where d is in astronomical units, p is measured in years, and m1 + m2 is the sum of the masses of the two stars in units of the sun’s mass. this is a very useful formula for astronomers; it says that if we can observe the size of the orbit and the period of mutual revolution of the stars in a binary system, we can calculate the sum of their masses. most spectroscopic binaries have periods ranging from a few days to a few months, with separations of usually less than 1 au between their member stars. recall that an au is the distance from earth to the sun, so this is a small separation and very hard to see at the distances of stars. this is why many of these systems are known to be double only through careful study of their spectra.