why? 16. if the sun could suddenly collapse to a black hole, how would the period of earth’s revolution about it differ from what it is now? 17. suppose the people in figure 24.4 are in an elevator moving upward with an acceleration equal to g, but in the opposite direction. the woman throws the ball to the man with a horizontal force. what happens to the ball? 18. you arrange to meet a friend at 5:00 p.m. on valentine’s day on the observation deck of the empire state building in new york city. you arrive right on time, but your friend is not there. she arrives 5 minutes late and says the reason is that time runs faster at the top of a tall building, so she is on time but you were early. is your friend right? does time run slower or faster at the top of a building, as compared with its base? is this a reasonable excuse for your friend arriving 5 minutes late? 19. you are standing on a scale in an elevator when the cable snaps, sending the elevator car into free fall. before the automatic brakes stop your fall, you glance at the scale reading. does the scale show your real weight? an apparent weight?
something else? figuring for yourself 20. look up g, c, and the mass of the sun in appendix e and calculate the radius of a black hole that has the same mass as the sun. (note that this is only a theoretical calculation. the sun does not have enough mass to become a black hole.) 21. suppose you wanted to know the size of black holes with masses that are larger or smaller than the sun. you could go through all the steps in exercise 24.20, wrestling with a lot of large numbers with large exponents. you could be clever, however, and evaluate all the constants in the equation once and then simply vary the mass. you could even express the mass in terms of the sun’s mass and make future calculations really easy. show that the event horizon equation is equivalent to saying that the radius of the event horizon is equal to 3 km times the mass of the black hole in units of the sun’s mass. 22. use the result from exercise 24.21 to calculate the radius of a black hole with a mass equal to: the earth, a b0-type main-sequence star, a globular cluster, and the milky way galaxy.
look elsewhere in this text and the appendixes for tables that provide data on the mass of these four objects. 23. since the force of gravity a significant distance away from the event horizon of a black hole is the same as that of an ordinary object of the same mass, kepler’s third law is valid. suppose that earth collapsed to the size of a golf ball. what would be the period of revolution of the moon, orbiting at its current distance of 400,000 km? use kepler’s third law to calculate the period of revolution of a spacecraft orbiting at a distance of 6000 km. 860 24 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 25.1 milky way galaxy. the milky way rises over square tower, an ancestral pueblo building at hovenweep national monument in utah. many stars and dark clouds of dust combine to make a spectacular celestial sight of our home galaxy. the location has been designated an international dark sky park by the international dark sky association.
chapter outline 25.1 the architecture of the galaxy 25.2 spiral structure 25.3 the mass of the galaxy 25.4 the center of the galaxy 25.5 stellar populations in the galaxy 25.6 the formation of the galaxy thinking ahead today, we know that our sun is just one of the many billions of stars that make up the huge cosmic island we call the milky way galaxy. how can we “weigh” such an enormous system of stars and measure its total mass? one of the most striking features you can see in a truly dark sky—one without light pollution—is the band of faint white light called the milky way, which stretches from one horizon to the other. the name comes from an ancient greek legend that compared its faint white splash of light to a stream of spilled milk. but folktales differ from culture to culture: one east african tribe thought of the hazy band as the smoke of ancient campfires, several native american stories tell of a path across the sky traveled by sacred animals, and in siberia, the diffuse arc was known as the seam of the tent of the sky.