for more information on these experiments go to the websites indicated: for ligo: http://www.ligo.org/ for virgo: http://www.virgo-gw.eu/ whereas electromagnetic radiation in the form of the cosmic microwave background radiation can take us back towards the big bang to the point where the universe was transparent to photons at an age of 378,000 years, gravitational radiation in the form of gravitational waves can take us back to the point where the universe became transparent to gravity at 10-43 seconds after the big bang. it is believed that these waves would originate from two massive orbiting objects and also from supernovae explosions. they were first observered in 2015. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page312_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page312_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 313 figure 364: tuning fork diagram based on a drawing by inductiveload component 142 – classification of galaxies when we peer out into space we see many stars and other objects that are fairly close by. but we also see large collections of stars and objects that are quite far away and seem to be their own islands.
when you have millions, billions, or even trillions of stars that are all gravitationally bound to each other, you have a galaxy. when we survey our skies, we see that there are billions of these galaxies in all directions. initially, astronomers were not aware that there were structures beyond our local galaxy. edwin hubble, in 1924 was the first astronomer to classify galaxies into classes. his classes were: spiral galaxies, barred-spiral galaxies, elliptical galaxies, and irregular galaxies. these classifications are often shown in a tuning fork diagram. e0 through e7 are elliptical galaxies. e0 is round and e7 is cigar shaped. s0 is a galaxy with a disk but no evidence of spiral arms. the s galaxies are the spiral galaxies, and the sb galaxies are the barred-spiral galaxies. the a, b, and c designations show how tightly the spiral arms are wound. an “a” indicates those that are fairly tightly wound. a “c” indicates those that are loosely wound.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page313_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 314 figure 365: parts of a barred spiral galaxy figure 366: parts of a spiral galaxy component 143 – spiral and barred spiral galaxies some galaxies are large rotating disks of stars. there are two types of spiral galaxies, those with bars (type sb) and those without bars (type s). these types are then broken up into sub-categories based on the size of the central bulge (large to small: sa, sb, and sc; and sba, sbb, and sbc). spiral type galaxies often have billions of stars, although some are smaller and may have only millions of stars. these are the parts of spiral and barred spiral galaxies: • the central black hole • the central bulge • the bar (found in barred spirals only) • the galactic disk • the spiral arms • dust lanes • the galactic halo the central bulge the central bulge is composed of older stars in random orbits. there is very little dust and gas.
a larger bulge means: • a larger black hole • more tightly wound spiral arms • more spiral arms • better defined spiral arms [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page314_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page314_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 315 figure 367: type s0 galaxy figure 368: type sa spiral galaxy figure 369: type sba galaxy figure 372: type sc spiral galaxy figure 373: type sbc galaxy figure 370: type sb spiral galaxy figure 371: type sbb galaxy the disk the disk has much dust and gas. it is the site of much star formation and there are many open star clusters. there are many young stars. this is also where the spiral arms are found. the class of galaxy that has a disk but no detectable spiral arms is class s0. the spiral arms spiral arms are tight and orderly as in subclass a, or they can be loose and sloppy as in subclass c. these are represented by images in figure 368 through figure 373. the halo the halo is roughly spherical and is the diameter of the galactic disk.