nuclear epoch continued expansion of the universe, from 100 seconds to 50,000 years after the big bang, has caused it to cool to the point where protons and neutrons are not destroyed by high-energy photons, and also deuterium, and helium can be formed. nucleus the center of an atom containing protons and neutrons. olber's paradox if the universe is infinite, homogeneous, and isotropic, then no matter where you look you will see light from a star. if this were true, then the universe at night should be as bright as the surface of the sun. there should be no dark nighttime skies. of course there is. olympus mons the largest volcano in the solar system. oort cloud a large sphere of cometary bodies well beyond the kuiper belt. open cluster star clusters that are thousands of stars. they formed relatively recently and over time will drift apart. open universe the universe is shaped like a saddle. space is curved, but is infinite. opposition the point when a superior planet is on the opposite side of the earth from the sun. outflow channels evidence on the surface of mars apparently caused by large amounts of flowing water moving from the highlands to the plains.
ozone layer a layer in the stratosphere where ultraviolet radiation from the sun is absorbed by ozone (o3) and nitrogen. pair production in the early universe photons of very high energy would collide and create a pair of particles (for example, a astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 408 positron and an electron). these particles would find each other and almost immediately annihilate each other and turn back to photons. pangaea the name of the continent formed about 200 million years ago that was broken apart my continental drift. pencil beam theory a survey of galaxies that cover a small field but looks deep into the universe. it is pencil shaped. penumbra the lighter outer portion of a sunspot. phobos one of mars’ moons, probably a captured asteroid. photoelectric effect the effect discovered by einstein that proves that light behaves like particles, not just waves. photometry the measurement of the strength or brightness of an astronomical object. photons the particle form of electromagnetic radiation. photosphere the surface of the sun. this is the layer that we see in a telescope with a simple solar filter.
planet a body that is orbiting a star (or the sun) that must meet these three requirements in our solar system: massive enough to become basically a sphere, orbit the sun, and are massive enough to have cleared their orbit of debris. planetary nebula the final result of oscillations in a sun-like star resulting in the outer layers of the atmosphere being blown off in a growing bubble. the core collapses into a white dwarf. planetary transits a common technique for detecting planets around other stars as they move across the face of their star and cause a slight dimming in the star’s luminosity. planetesimals small objects that continue to grow into planets. planck epoch the first 10-43 seconds after the big bang. our theories can’t tell us what occurred at this time. all four fundamental forces were unified at this time. plate tectonics the motion of large chunks of the earth’s crust. also known as continental drift. polarized light light waves oriented in the same direction. prime focus the point where the image is in focus in a reflecting telescope after only bouncing off the primary mirror. prism a triangular piece of glass in a spectroscope that causes the different frequencies of light to separate.
prominences loops and sheets of the sun’s materials that rise above the surface of the sun along the magnetic field lines. they may last for days. proton-proton chain the nuclear fusion reaction that combines protons to produce helium. it is the more common process believed to occur in smaller stars. protons not so small positively charged particles that exist in the nucleus of an atom. protoplanets larger objects that are almost formed into planets. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 409 protostar the stage of a star’s life after it has collapsed into a sphere, but before it has begun nuclear fusion. protostellar disk the disk of material surrounding a protostar that will eventually form into the planets. protostellar winds the strong winds that radiate from stars while they are forming and in the protostar stage. these often appear as jets of material streaming from the poles of the protostar. pulsar a rapidly rotating neutron star when the magnetic axis is different from the rotation axis. material that is ejected from the magnetic poles rotates around and once each cycle is pointed at the earth. quark a tiny particle of which protons and neutrons are composed.