what he was really looking for was a planet inside the orbit of mercury, which he hoped to find by observing its dark silhouette as it passed between the sun and earth. he failed to find the hoped-for planet, but his diligence paid off with an even-more important discovery: the sunspot cycle. he found that the number of sunspots varied systematically, in cycles about a decade long. what schwabe observed was that, although individual spots are short lived, the total number visible on the sun at any one time was likely to be very much greater at certain times—the periods of sunspot maximum—than at other times—the periods of sunspot minimum. we now know that sunspot maxima occur at an average interval of 11 years, but the intervals between successive maxima have ranged from as short as 9 years to as long as 14 years. during sunspot maxima, more than 100 spots can often be seen at once. even then, less than one-half of one percent of the sun’s surface is covered by spots (figure 15.22). during sunspot minima, sometimes no spots are visible. the sun’s activity is reaching its next maximum in the 2024–25 timeframe.
watch this brief video (https://openstax.org/l/30solarcyc) from nasa’s goddard space flight center that explains the sunspot cycle. explore the number of sunspots (https://openstax.org/l/30numsunspots) measured each year going back to 1707. point your cursor at any year, and the diagram tells you the number of sunspots. magnetism and the solar cycle now that we have discussed the sun’s activity cycle, you might be asking, “why does the sun change in such a link to learning 522 15 • the sun: a garden-variety star access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page540_img1.jpeg] regular way?” astronomers now understand that it is the sun’s changing magnetic field that drives solar activity. the solar magnetic field is measured using a property of atoms called the zeeman effect. recall from radiation and spectra that an atom has many energy levels and that spectral lines are formed when electrons shift from one level to another. if each energy level is precisely defined, then the difference between them is also quite precise.
as an electron changes levels, the result is a sharp, narrow spectral line (either an absorption or emission line, depending on whether the electron’s energy increases or decreases in the transition). in the presence of a strong magnetic field, however, each energy level is separated into several levels very close to one another. the separation of the levels is proportional to the strength of the field. as a result, spectral lines formed in the presence of a magnetic field are not single lines but a series of very closely spaced lines corresponding to the subdivisions of the atomic energy levels. this splitting of lines in the presence of a magnetic field is what we call the zeeman effect (after the dutch scientist who first discovered it in 1896). measurements of the zeeman effect in the spectra of the light from sunspot regions show them to have strong magnetic fields (figure 15.15). bear in mind that magnets always have a north pole and a south pole. whenever sunspots are observed in pairs, or in groups containing two principal spots, one of the spots usually has the magnetic polarity of a north-seeking magnetic pole and the other has the opposite polarity.
moreover, during a given cycle, the leading spots of pairs (or leading principal spots of groups) in the northern hemisphere all tend to have the same polarity, whereas those in the southern hemisphere all tend to have the opposite polarity. figure 15.15 zeeman effect. these photographs show how magnetic fields in sunspots are measured by means of the zeeman effect. (left) the vertical black line indicates the position of the spectrograph slit through which light is passed to obtain the spectrum in (right). (credit: modification of work by nso/aura/nsf) during the next sunspot cycle, however, the polarity of the leading spots is reversed in each hemisphere. for example, if during one cycle, the leading spots in the northern hemisphere all had the polarity of a north- seeking pole, then the leading spots in the southern hemisphere would have the polarity of a south-seeking pole. during the next cycle, the leading spots in the northern hemisphere would have south-seeking polarity, whereas those in the southern hemisphere would have north-seeking polarity. therefore, strictly speaking, the sunspot cycle does not repeat itself in regard to magnetic polarity until two 11-year cycles have passed.