the last two classifications: t and y are not really stars. they are too small to build up the pressures and temperatures necessary to do proton-proton chain fusion and are failed stars. they are large enough that they can fuse deuterium into helium, so they are not planets. these spectral classes are then divided into 10 subclasses numbered from 0 to 9. subclass 0 is the hottest, and subclass 9 is the coolest. the sun is a g2 star. spectral complexity hotter stars have simpler spectra than cooler stars. this is because the increased temperature means that atoms are moving at higher speeds. these atoms tend to smash into molecules and break them apart. very hot stars tend to have primarily hydrogen and helium spectral lines. as the star temperatures decrease more atoms are present in the spectra, until you get to m stars, where molecules also appear.
astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 254 table 29: spectral types type name o extremely luminous supergiants ia luminous supergiants ib less luminous supergiants ii bright giants iii normal giants iv sub-giants v main sequence vi sub-dwarfs d (or vii) white dwarfs component 107 – the hr diagram two astronomers, ejnar hertzsprung and henry norris russell, found that it was useful to plot stars in a chart that has luminosity on the verticle axis and temperature on the horizontal axis. the chart is used as a snapshot. it is a picture in time of where a specific population of stars are based on their luminosity and temperature. remember that luminosity is in solar units; 1 is the brightess of the sun. we have also seen that in addition to temperature, the horizontal axis can also show color and spectral class. the basic hr diagram figure 300 shows a number of familiar bright stars as they appear in the appropriate locations on the hr diagram. the verticle axis includes a luminosity scale in solar units as well as the absolute magnitude scale. the horizontal scale shows the spectral classifications, the color, and the temperature in k.
note that there appears to be a line of stars going from the top left to the bottom right (from mintaka to proxima centauri) of which the sun is a member. we notice that there are a small number of stars below and to the left of this line (sirius b and procyon b). the value of using the hr diagram is that if we can place a star in the right place on this diagram then we can approximate many of that star’s characteristics. in addition to the two axis of the chart, we are able to superimpose more information on the chart. spectral types when we plot many stars on the hr diagram we notice that they fall on paths. these paths are referred to as spectral types. they are show in figure 301 as roman numerals i through vi, and there is a type near the bottom for white dwarf stars; type d or vii. there is also a spectral type at the top; o for extremely luminous supergiants or hypergiants. note that there are two lines for spectral type i: ia – luminous supergiants and ib – less luminous supergiants. table 29 lists the different spectral types and their names.
astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 255 figure 300: a basic hr diagram [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page255_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 256 figure 301: hr diagram with spectral types the sun is a type g2v star [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page256_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 257 spectral regions figure 302 is an hr diagram that shows the regions in which different types of stars can be found. the blue oval at the top is the realm of the supergiants. the pink oval near the right side is the realm of the giants. the green oval near the bottom is the realm of the white dwarfs. note that there is a gray band running from the center of the bottom to the top right. this is called the instability strip. stars that are found within this region are not stable stars. they tend to oscillate and include the variable stars. the small purple oval in this region is the realm of the rr lyrae variables stars, and the larger dark yellow oval is the realm of the cepheid variable stars.