sunspots sunspots are not really cool or dark, they are simply cooler than the surrounding surface of the sun, and therefore appear darker. they usually come in pairs. one sunspot is the location where one pole of a magnetic field exits the sun. the other sunspot is the location where the magnetic field re-enters the sun. the inner and darker part of the spot is called the umbra. the not- so-dark outer area is called the penumbra. sunspots are thought to be caused by the sun’s differential rotation. the equator rotates faster than the surface nearer the poles. this stretches the sun’s magnetic field lines. at times these field lines warp and extend out into the sun’s lower atmosphere. this produces the prominences that we see. sunspot cycles the sun’s magnetic polarity is believed to switch every 11 years. sunspots appear in a 22-year sunspot cycle composed of two of these 11-year parts. during the first part, in the northern hemisphere, the leading spot in each pair is the north magnetic pole. in the southern hemisphere it is the southern magnetic pole. during the second part of the cycle the magnetic poles are switched.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page242_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page242_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 243 figure 287: sunspot latitude by year figure 288: number of sunspots by year figure 289: the maunder minimum each piece of the cycle begins with very low sunspot activity. the activity increases to a maximum and then returns to near zero (see figure 288). during each piece of the cycle the sunspots first appear farther away from the equator, and as the cycle progresses they are located closer to the equator (see figure 287). in the late 1600s there was an extended period of time when there were few sunspots. this is referred to as the maunder minimum (see figure 289). this resulted in a drop in solar radiation and a corresponding drop in temperature on the earth and a mini-ice age.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page243_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page243_img2.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page243_img3.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 244 figure 290: solar flares figure 292: coronal mass ejection figure 291: solar prominence figure 293: coronal hole using a hydrogen-alpha telescope we are able to see details of these prominences near the sun’s surface. they are especially pronounced when they occur around the edge of the disk. solar flares solar flares are short-lived eruptions on the surface of the sun. they are close to the surface, only last a few minutes and are quite violent (figure 290). solar prominences solar prominences may last for weeks. they are large but less violent eruptions on the sun’s surface (figure 291). coronal mass ejections at times, giant clouds of charged material are ejected from the sun. these are called a coronal mass ejections. they occur weekly during low sunspot activity, and a few times each day during peak activity. these clouds of material move quickly out into the solar system (figure 292).
when the charged particles of a coronal mass ejection reach earth they put pressure on the sunward side of the earth’s magnetosphere. the charged particles in the cloud spiral around the magnetic field lines as they migrate towards the magnetic poles. as they enter the atmosphere, they are responsible for the aurorae we see. these charged particles can have serious consequences for electrical equipment. satellites are put to sleep to prevent damage, and astronauts seek shelter in protected areas of the space station. coronal mass ejections originate on the sun’s surface in regions called coronal holes (figure 293). these are thin regions in the sun’s corona where there is a high-speed solar wind. large holes may last decades and can be hundreds of thousands of kilometers across. smaller holes may appear every few hours.