the density of an object equals its mass divided by its volume. the volume (v) of a sphere (like a planet) is calculated using the equation 2 an au (or astronomical unit) is the distance from earth to the sun. 3 we give densities in units where the density of water is 1 g/cm3. to get densities in units of kg/m3, multiply the given value by 1000. 230 7 • other worlds: an introduction to the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page248_img1.jpeg] where π (the greek letter pi) has a value of approximately 3.14. although planets are not perfect spheres, this equation works well enough. the masses and diameters of the planets are given in table 7.2. for data on selected moons, see appendix g. let’s use saturn’s moon mimas as our example, with a mass of kg and a diameter of approximately 400 km (radius, ). solution the volume of mimas is density is mass divided by volume: note that the density of water in these units is 1000 kg/m3, so mimas must be made mainly of ice, not rock.
(note that the density of mimas given in appendix g is 1.2, but the units used there are different. in that table, we give density in units of g/cm3, for which the density of water equals 1. can you show, by converting units, that 1 g/cm3 is the same as 1000 kg/m3?) check your learning calculate the average density of our own planet, earth. show your work. how does it compare to the density of an ice moon like mimas? see table 7.2 for data. answer: for a sphere, for earth, then, this density is four to five times greater than mimas’. in fact, earth is the densest of the planets. learn more about nasa’s mission to pluto (https://openstax.org/l/30nasamisspluto) and see high- resolution images of pluto and its moon charon. smaller members of the solar system most of the planets are accompanied by one or more moons; only mercury and venus move through space alone. there are more than 420 known moons orbiting planets and dwarf planets (see appendix g for a listing of the larger ones), and undoubtedly many other small ones remain undiscovered.
the largest of the moons are as big as small planets and just as interesting. in addition to our moon, they include the four largest moons of jupiter (called the galilean moons, after their discoverer) and the largest moons of saturn and neptune (confusingly named titan and triton). link to learning 7.1 • overview of our planetary system 231 each of the giant planets also has rings made up of countless small bodies ranging in size from mountains to mere grains of dust, all in orbit about the equator of the planet. the bright rings of saturn are, by far, the easiest to see. they are among the most beautiful sights in the solar system (figure 7.7). but, all four ring systems are interesting to scientists because of their complicated forms, influenced by the pull of the moons that also orbit these giant planets. figure 7.7 saturn and its rings. this 2007 cassini image shows saturn and its complex system of rings, taken from a distance of about 1.2 million kilometers. this natural-color image is a composite of 36 images taken over the course of 2.5 hours.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl/space science institute) the solar system has many other less-conspicuous members. another group is the asteroids, rocky bodies that orbit the sun like miniature planets, mostly in the space between mars and jupiter (although some do cross the orbits of planets like earth—see figure 7.8). most asteroids are remnants of the initial population of the solar system that existed before the planets themselves formed. some of the smallest moons of the planets, such as the moons of mars, are very likely captured asteroids. figure 7.8 asteroid eros. this small earth-crossing asteroid image was taken by the near-shoemaker spacecraft from an altitude of about 100 kilometers. this view of the heavily cratered surface is about 10 kilometers wide. the spacecraft orbited eros for a year before landing gently on its surface. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jhuapl) another class of small bodies is composed mostly of ice, made of frozen gases such as water, carbon dioxide, and carbon monoxide; these objects are called comets (see figure 7.9).