[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page356_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 357 figure 437: the quarks diagram by missmj component 176 – the quark epoch at the end of the gut epoch, the electromagnetic force and the weak nuclear force are still coupled. scientists refer to this as the electroweak theory. when the temperature of the universe dropped to 1015 k conditions were right for the production of protons, neutrons, and the quarks of which they are made. at this point, the weak nuclear force and the electromagnetic force decouple and we now have the four fundamental forces of physics that we see today. the quark epoch occurred between 10-35 and 10-4 seconds after the big bang. during this epoch the energy levels were still high enough to have photons with enough energy to create protons and neutrons through the process of pair production. by the end of this epoch, the energy has dropped to the point where these heavier particles can no longer be created. the standard theory states that there are 6 quarks, and each has its anti- quark.
they are called the up, down, top, bottom, strange, and charm quarks. figure 437 shows these quarks and some of their properties. protons are composed of two up quarks and one down quark. neutrons are composed of two down quarks and one up quark. during the quark epoch, the weak force decouples with the electromagnetic force. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page357_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 358 component 177 – the lepton epoch at the end of the quark epoch, the universe moved into the lepton epoch. leptons are the small, lightweight particles. since they are lighter, it is possible to create them with lower energy photons. leptons are electrons, muons, and neutrinos. the lepton epoch occurred from 10-4 to 100 seconds after the big bang. at about 1 second after the big bang, the universe has cooled sufficiently, 3 * 1010 k, and the universe becomes transparent to neutrinos. at 100 seconds after the big bang the lepton epoch ends. the temperature would be about 109 k.
at this temperature, the photons no longer have sufficient energy to continue pair production of the leptons. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 359 primordial fusion used protons and neutrons to create helium figure 438: primordial nuclear fusion component 178 – the nuclear epoch the last epoch of the radiation era is called the nuclear epoch. it occurred from 100 to 1.6*1012 seconds after the big bang. the building blocks of atoms have been created. the universe has cooled sufficiently that as atoms begin to form they are not instantly blown apart by high energy particles. the temperature was still around 3 * 108 k. the universe was dense enough, and this temperature is high enough, to cause nuclear fusion. fusion would have progressed very quickly, and by the time the universe was about 15 minutes old, it would have expanded and cooled to the point where fusion would cease. deuterium (heavy hydrogen) and helium would have been created in this short period of time, and the concentrations would be close to what we see today. fusion that occurred in the early universe was different than the fusion we see in stars today. temperatures would have been higher and the available materials would have been different.
helium was created using protons and neutrons, rather than just protons as in the proton- proton chain. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page359_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 360 the cmbr we see today as radio waves was infrared when the universe became transparent the amount of deuterium tells us the abundance of other atoms in the early universe – this tells us the density of matter in the universe component 179 – the atomic epoch at the end of the radiation dominated era the abundance of hydrogen, deuterium, helium, and lithium was set. at this point, the abundance of dark matter was also set. it was at this time that radiation and matter decoupled. as the temperature of the universe dropped to approximately 3000 k, it was cool enough for electrons to combine with the primordial atoms. prior to this point, the electrons were free in the universe and were constantly interacting with the photons. this means that photons were continuously interacting with the electrons and were not free to travel through space. cosmic microwave background radiation with the cooler temperatures, and the electrons combining with the protons, the universe became largely transparent to photons.