the surface markings of the convection cells create a granulation pattern on this dramatic image (left) taken from the japanese hinode spacecraft. you can see the same pattern when you heat up miso soup. the right image shows an irregular-shaped sunspot and granules on the sun’s surface, seen with the swedish solar telescope on august 22, 2003. (credit left: modification of work by hinode jaxa/nasa/pparc; credit right: isp/sst/oddbjorn engvold, jun elin wiik, luc rouppe van der voort) the motions of the granules can be studied by examining the doppler shifts in the spectra of gases just above them (see the doppler effect). the bright granules are columns of hotter gases rising at speeds of 2 to 3 kilometers per second from below the photosphere. as this rising gas reaches the photosphere, it spreads out, cools, and sinks down again into the darker regions between the granules. measurements show that the centers of the granules are hotter than the intergranular regions by 50 to 100 k.
see the “boiling” action of granulation in this 30-second time-lapse video (https://openstax.org/l/ 30solargran) from the swedish institute for solar physics. link to learning 15.1 • the structure and composition of the sun 515 [image: astronomy_openstax_page533_img1.jpeg] the chromosphere the sun’s outer gases extend far beyond the photosphere (figure 15.7). because they are transparent to most visible radiation and emit only a small amount of light, these outer layers are difficult to observe. the region of the sun’s atmosphere that lies immediately above the photosphere is called the chromosphere. until this century, the chromosphere was visible only when the photosphere was concealed by the moon during a total solar eclipse (see the chapter on earth, moon, and sky). in the seventeenth century, several observers described what appeared to them as a narrow red “streak” or “fringe” around the edge of the moon during a brief instant after the sun’s photosphere had been covered. the name chromosphere, from the greek for “colored sphere,” was given to this red streak. figure 15.7 the sun’s atmosphere.
composite image showing the three components of the solar atmosphere: the photosphere or surface of the sun taken in ordinary light; the chromosphere, imaged in the light of the strong red spectral line of hydrogen (h- alpha); and the corona as seen with x-rays. (credit: modification of work by nasa) observations made during eclipses show that the chromosphere is about 2000 to 3000 kilometers thick, and its spectrum consists of bright emission lines, indicating that this layer is composed of hot gases emitting light at discrete wavelengths. the reddish color of the chromosphere arises from one of the strongest emission lines in the visible part of its spectrum—the bright red line caused by hydrogen, the element that, as we have already seen, dominates the composition of the sun. in 1868, observations of the chromospheric spectrum revealed a yellow emission line that did not correspond to any previously known element on earth. scientists quickly realized they had found a new element and named it helium (after helios, the greek word for “sun”). it took until 1895 for helium to be discovered on our planet.
today, students are probably most familiar with it as the light gas used to inflate balloons, although it turns out to be the second-most abundant element in the universe. the temperature of the chromosphere is about 10,000 k. this means that the chromosphere is hotter than the photosphere, which should seem surprising. in all the situations we are familiar with, temperatures fall as one moves away from the source of heat, and the chromosphere is farther from the center of the sun than the photosphere is. the transition region the increase in temperature does not stop with the chromosphere. above it is a region in the solar atmosphere where the temperature changes from 10,000 k (typical of the chromosphere) to nearly a million degrees. the hottest part of the solar atmosphere, which has a temperature of a million degrees or more, is called the corona. appropriately, the part of the sun where the rapid temperature rise occurs is called the transition region. it is probably only a few tens of kilometers thick. figure 15.8 summarizes how the temperature of the solar atmosphere changes from the photosphere outward.