the first two laws of planetary motion were published in 1609 in the new astronomy. their discovery was a profound step in the development of modern science. the first two laws of planetary motion the path of an object through space is called its orbit. kepler initially assumed that the orbits of planets were circles, but doing so did not allow him to find orbits that were consistent with brahe’s observations. working with the data for mars, he eventually discovered that the orbit of that planet had the shape of a somewhat flattened circle, or ellipse. next to the circle, the ellipse is the simplest kind of closed curve, belonging to a family of curves known as conic sections (figure 3.3). figure 3.3 conic sections. the circle, ellipse, parabola, and hyperbola are all formed by the intersection of a plane with a cone. this is why such curves are called conic sections. you might recall from math classes that in a circle, the center is a special point. the distance from the center to anywhere on the circle is exactly the same. in an ellipse, the sum of the distance from two special points inside the ellipse to any point on the ellipse is always the same.
these two points inside the ellipse are called its foci (singular: focus), a word invented for this purpose by kepler. this property suggests a simple way to draw an ellipse (figure 3.4). we wrap the ends of a loop of string 3.1 • the laws of planetary motion 71 [image: astronomy_openstax_page89_img1.jpeg] around two tacks pushed through a sheet of paper into a drawing board, so that the string is slack. if we push a pencil against the string, making the string taut, and then slide the pencil against the string all around the tacks, the curve that results is an ellipse. at any point where the pencil may be, the sum of the distances from the pencil to the two tacks is a constant length—the length of the string. the tacks are at the two foci of the ellipse. the widest diameter of the ellipse is called its major axis. half this distance—that is, the distance from the center of the ellipse to one end—is the semimajor axis, which is usually used to specify the size of the ellipse.
for example, the semimajor axis of the orbit of mars, which is also the planet’s average distance from the sun, is 228 million kilometers. figure 3.4 drawing an ellipse. (a) we can construct an ellipse by pushing two tacks (the white objects) into a piece of paper on a drawing board, and then looping a string around the tacks. each tack represents a focus of the ellipse, with one of the tacks being the sun. stretch the string tight using a pencil, and then move the pencil around the tacks. the length of the string remains the same, so that the sum of the distances from any point on the ellipse to the foci is always constant. (b) in this illustration, each semimajor axis is denoted by a. the distance 2a is called the major axis of the ellipse. the shape (roundness) of an ellipse depends on how close together the two foci are, compared with the major axis. the ratio of the distance between the foci to the length of the major axis is called the eccentricity of the ellipse. if the foci (or tacks) are moved to the same location, then the distance between the foci would be zero.
this means that the eccentricity is zero and the ellipse is just a circle; thus, a circle can be called an ellipse of zero eccentricity. in a circle, the semimajor axis would be the radius. next, we can make ellipses of various elongations (or extended lengths) by varying the spacing of the tacks (as long as they are not farther apart than the length of the string). the greater the eccentricity, the more elongated is the ellipse, up to a maximum eccentricity of , when the ellipse becomes “flat,” the other extreme from a circle. the size and shape of an ellipse are completely specified by its semimajor axis and its eccentricity. using brahe’s data, kepler found that mars has an elliptical orbit, with the sun at one focus (the other focus is empty). the eccentricity of the orbit of mars is only about ; its orbit, drawn to scale, would be practically indistinguishable from a circle, but the difference turned out to be critical for understanding planetary motions. kepler generalized this result in his first law and said that the orbits of all the planets are ellipses.