the shape of the dust by observing light that has passed through dust clouds, astronomers know that the dust particles are shaped like rice, long and thin, but very much smaller. the light passing through some of these clouds is partially polarized. this means the dust must be long and thin, and also somewhat aligned in the same direction. the currently accepted theory is that there is a weak magnetic field. this would help explain why the particles are aligned. the density of interstellar dust dust and gas are everywhere. even in the vacuum of space, there are still dust and gas. the average concentration of interstellar gas is only 1,000,000 atoms per cubic meter, and ranges from 1,000 to 1,000,000,000 atoms per cubic meter. there is only an average of 1000 dust grains per cubic kilometer. this is not very dense, but space is dirty. over the vast distances of empty space the number of dust grains adds up and it is possible to have so much dust between the earth and the object we are trying to see that the object is not visible. composition of interstellar dust by studying the light that passes through dust clouds it is possible to determine the composition of those dust clouds.
absorption lines are visible in the spectra of those stars. which dark lines are present tells astronomers which elements are present in the cloud. the gas seems primarily to be made of hydrogen and helium with other elements and molecules in small portions. the dust seems to be a collection of the atoms and molecules in the gas. there seems to be some water ice, silicates, iron, ammonia, and methane. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 293 figure 325: the entire milky way galaxy photo by eso (the european southern observatory) figure 326: the sombrero galaxy figure 327: the coal sack dark nebula component 126 – dark nebulae when the dust is so thick or the cloud is so big that light doesn’t pass through the cloud it is called a dark nebula. these clouds are apparent when we look towards the center of our galaxy, or at other galaxies edge-on. figure 325 shows the entire milky way galaxy as seen from earth. the dark lanes that are visible through the center of the pictures are dust and gas clouds between the earth and the distant stars. there is so much dust and gas that we are not able to see the center of the milky way galaxy.
the sombrero galaxy also shows a dense dust cloud around the edge of the galaxy as shown in figure 326. light from stars as seen through a dust cloud often appears reddish. the bluer colors are scattered by the dust and gas in the nebula. this is very apparent by all of the red stars visible in the coal sack dark nebula in figure 327. some dense dust clouds that are quite cool have much more than atoms in their dust. many clouds have been found that have high concentrations of molecules. these clouds are called molecular clouds. these clouds are among the largest dust clouds known. the dust provides material to form the molecules as well as blocking interstellar radiation and preventing it from shattering the molecules. many different molecules have been identified including water, ammonia, formaldehyde, methane, and benzene. they have also found amino acids.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page293_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page293_img2.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page293_img3.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 294 figure 328: the horsehead nebula photo by ken crawford figure 330: the north america nebula photo by philipp salzgeber figure 329: the orion nebula photo by opo terser component 127 – emission nebulae as we learned in spectroscopy (component 32) light in specific frequencies is absorbed by various elements in a gas and dust cloud. electrons are taken to a higher energy state, and eventually return to lower energy states. this re-emitted light is sent in different direction from the original light. when we see this re-emitted light from earth, it makes the dust cloud glow. the most common element in the universe is hydrogen. the most common emission line associated with hydrogen in the visible part of the spectrum is the balmer series hydrogen- alpha line at a wavelength of 656.281 nm, which is red. gas and dust clouds in space that are emitting light are called emission nebulae.