if a quasar is moving away from us at v/c = 0.8, what is the measured redshift? 23. in the chapter, we discussed that the largest redshifts found so far are greater than 6. suppose we find a quasar with a redshift of 6.1. with what fraction of the speed of light is it moving away from us? 24. rapid variability in quasars indicates that the region in which the energy is generated must be small. you can show why this is true. suppose, for example, that the region in which the energy is generated is a 27 • exercises 953 transparent sphere 1 light-year in diameter. suppose that in 1 s this region brightens by a factor of 10 and remains bright for two years, after which it returns to its original luminosity. draw its light curve (a graph of its brightness over time) as viewed from earth. 25. large redshifts move the positions of spectral lines to longer wavelengths and change what can be observed from the ground.
for example, suppose a quasar has a redshift of at what wavelength would you make observations in order to detect its lyman line of hydrogen, which has a laboratory or rest wavelength of 121.6 nm? would this line be observable with a ground-based telescope in a quasar with zero redshift? would it be observable from the ground in a quasar with a redshift of 26. once again in this chapter, we see the use of kepler’s third law to estimate the mass of supermassive black holes. in the case of ngc 4261, this chapter supplied the result of the calculation of the mass of the black hole in ngc 4261. in order to get this answer, astronomers had to measure the velocity of particles in the ring of dust and gas that surrounds the black hole. how high were these velocities? turn kepler’s third law around and use the information given in this chapter about the galaxy ngc 4261—the mass of the black hole at its center and the diameter of the surrounding ring of dust and gas—to calculate how long it would take a dust particle in the ring to complete a single orbit around the black hole.
assume that the only force acting on the dust particle is the gravitational force exerted by the black hole. calculate the velocity of the dust particle in km/s. 27. in the check your learning section of example 27.1, you were told that several lines of hydrogen absorption in the visible spectrum have rest wavelengths of 410 nm, 434 nm, 486 nm, and 656 nm. in a spectrum of a distant galaxy, these same lines are observed to have wavelengths of 492 nm, 521 nm, 583 nm, and 787 nm, respectively. the example demonstrated that z = 0.20 for the 410 nm line. show that you will obtain the same redshift regardless of which absorption line you measure. 28. in the check your learning section of example 27.1, the author commented that even at z = 0.2, there is already an 11% deviation between the relativistic and the classical solution. what is the percentage difference between the classical and relativistic results at z = 0.1? what is it for z = 0.5? what is it for z = 1? 29.
the quasar that appears the brightest in our sky, 3c 273, is located at a distance of 2.4 billion light-years. the sun would have to be viewed from a distance of 1300 light-years to have the same apparent magnitude as 3c 273. using the inverse square law for light, estimate the luminosity of 3c 273 in solar units. 954 27 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 28.1 colliding galaxies. collisions and mergers of galaxies strongly influence their evolution. on the left is a ground-based image of two colliding galaxies (ncg 4038 and 4039), sometimes nicknamed the antennae galaxies. the long, luminous tails are material torn out of the galaxies by tidal forces during the collision. the right image shows the inner regions of these two galaxies, as taken by the hubble space telescope. the cores of the twin galaxies are the orange blobs to the lower left and upper right of the center of the image. note the dark lanes of dust crossing in front of the bright regions. the bright pink and blue star clusters are the result of a burst of star formation stimulated by the collision.