this simulation of the greenhouse effect (https://openstax.org/l/30greeneffect) allows you to explore the effects on our average temperature of having more or less carbon dioxide and clouds on the earth. already climate change is widely apparent. around the world, temperature records are constantly set and broken; all but one of the hottest recorded years have taken place since 2000. glaciers are retreating, and the arctic sea ice is now much thinner than when it was first explored with nuclear submarines in the 1950s. rising sea levels (from both melting glaciers and expansion of the water as its temperature rises) pose one of the most immediate threats, and many coastal cities have plans to build dikes or seawalls to hold back the expected flooding. the rate of temperature increase is without historical precedent, and we are rapidly entering “unknown territory” where human activities are leading to the highest temperatures on earth in more than 50 million years.
link to learning 8.4 • life, chemical evolution, and climate change 275 [image: astronomy_openstax_page293_img1.jpeg] human impacts on our planet earth is so large and has been here for so long that some people have trouble accepting that humans are really changing the planet, its atmosphere, and its climate. they are surprised to learn, for example, that the carbon dioxide released from burning fossil fuels is 100 times greater than that emitted by volcanoes. but, the data clearly tell the story that our climate is changing rapidly, and that almost all of the change is a result of human activity. this is not the first time that humans have altered our environment dramatically. some of the greatest changes were caused by our ancestors, before the development of modern industrial society. if aliens had visited earth 50,000 years ago, they would have seen much of the planet supporting large animals of the sort that now survive only in africa. the plains of australia were occupied by giant marsupials such as diprotodon and zygomaturus (the size of our elephants today), and a species of kangaroo that stood 10 feet high.
north america and north asia hosted mammoths, saber tooth cats, mastodons, giant sloths, and even camels. the islands of the pacific teemed with large birds, and vast forests covered what are now the farms of europe and china. early human hunters killed many large mammals and marsupials, early farmers cut down most of the forests, and the polynesian expansion across the pacific doomed the population of large birds. an even greater mass extinction is underway as a result of rapid climate change. in recognition of our impact on the environment, scientists have proposed giving a new name to the current epoch, the anthropocene, when human activity started to have a significant global impact. although not an officially approved name, the concept of “anthropocene” is useful for recognizing that we humans now represent the dominant influence on our planet’s atmosphere and ecology, for better or for worse. 8.5 cosmic influences on the evolution of earth learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: in discussing earth’s geology earlier in this chapter, we dealt only with the effects of internal forces, expressed through the processes of plate tectonics and volcanism.
on the moon, in contrast, we see primarily craters, produced by the impacts of interplanetary debris such as asteroids and comets. why don’t we see more evidence on earth of the kinds of impact craters that are so prominent on the moon and other worlds? where are the craters on earth? it is not possible that earth escaped being struck by the interplanetary debris that has pockmarked the moon. from a cosmic perspective, the moon is almost next door. our atmosphere does make small pieces of cosmic debris burn up (which we see as meteors—commonly called shooting stars). but, the layers of our air provide no shield against the large impacts that form craters several kilometers in diameter and are common on the moon. in the course of its history, earth must therefore have been impacted as heavily as the moon. the difference is that, on earth, these craters are destroyed by our active geology before they can accumulate. as plate tectonics constantly renews our crust, evidence of past cratering events is slowly erased. only in the past few decades have geologists succeeded in identifying the eroded remnants of many impact craters (figure 8.19).