(this is newton’s analysis of the great comet of 1680-1 in the 1687 edition of the principia.) not all natural philosophers, however, accepted newton’s interpretation of the law of gravity as an attraction-at-a-distance force, because newton did not explain just how gravity was supposed to work. the reigning scientific philosophy of the 17th and 18th centuries required that actual mechanical models must be used in any explanation of natural phenomena, and newton did not do that. to men like christiaan huygens and gottfried wilhelm leibniz, it seemed that newton was trying to introduce mystical influences into natural philosophy. but on the whole, the principia made newton famous, and its principles were adopted well outside the field of natural philosophy. it would take several generations for science, philosophy, government, literature, art, religion, and all other institutions in western society to digest the full implications of universal scientific laws. but in the end, the scientific revolution proved to be, in the widest sense, truly revolutionary. old problems get new solutions isaac newton was not the only natural philosopher working on important astronomical problems in the late 17th century ce.
giovanni domenico cassini (1625-1712), an italian astronomer and astrologer, was hired by louis xiv of france in 1669 to establish an observatory [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page447_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 448 figure 490: distance to io in paris. as head of the new paris observatory, cassini hired an assistant, jean richer, and dispatched him to cayenne, just off the south american coast near french guyana. with richer in cayenne and cassini in paris making simultaneous angular measurements of the position of the planet mars, cassini calculated the earth-mars distance by parallax, or triangulation. then using kepler’s laws, he calculated the distance from the earth to the sun, or 1 au, the astronomical unit. cassini’s value of 140,000,000 km (about 87,000,000 miles), turns out to be off by less than 7%.
(a modern examination of cassini’s notes, however, has determined that there were many inaccuracies in both astronomers’ measurements, but their estimate of the baseline distance between cayenne and paris was also well off the mark. the errors mostly canceled out, luckily giving a reasonably good final value. such was the reputation of cassini throughout europe that later attempts to determine the astronomical unit were always referred back to his 1672 measurement, and those who came up with a significantly different number tended to withhold their own.) another of the assistants at the paris observatory was a dane, ole roemer (1644-1710). roemer was measuring the periods of the orbits of the moons of jupiter, but over several years kept getting values that differed significantly. jupiter’s moon io has a period of about 42 hours on average, as determined by the moment io disappears (is occulted) by jupiter’s disk. but instead of variations of perhaps a few seconds, he was getting variations of several minutes.
in 1676 he figured it out: as the earth in its orbit got closer to jupiter (at opposition), io’s period got shorter than the average by 11 minutes; and when the earth got farther away at conjunction), io’s period got longer than the average by 11 minutes. the conclusion: the light from io had farther to travel at conjunction than at opposition, which affected the timing of the eclipses measured by roemer back on earth. with values for cassini’s astronomical unit, roemer concluded that it took light 22 minutes to cross the earth’s orbit. this resulted in a calculated speed of light of just over 200,000 km/sec, or about 70% of the current value. this was the first reasonably accurate determination of the speed of light. more importantly, roemer showed that the speed of light was finite, not infinite as many previously had thought. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page448_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 449 figure 491: bradley's stellar parallax another problem that still had not been solved was the issue of stellar parallax.