if earth were just a little bit warmer, some materials that are now liquid or solid might become part of the atmosphere. suppose, for example, that our planet were heated to above the boiling point of water (100 °c, or 373 k); that’s a large change for humans, but a small change compared to the range of possible temperatures in the universe. at 100 °c, the oceans would boil and the resulting water vapor would become a part of the atmosphere. to estimate how much water vapor would be released, note that there is enough water to cover the entire earth to a depth of about 300 meters. because the pressure exerted by 10 meters of water is equal to about 1 bar, the average pressure at the ocean floor is about 300 bars. water weighs the same whether in liquid or vapor form, so if the oceans boiled away, the atmospheric pressure of the water would still be 300 bars. water would therefore greatly dominate earth’s atmosphere, with nitrogen and oxygen reduced to the status of trace constituents. on a warmer earth, another source of additional atmosphere would be found in the sedimentary carbonate rocks of the crust. these minerals contain abundant carbon dioxide.
if all these rocks were heated, they would release about 70 bars of co2, far more than the current co2 pressure of only 0.0005 bar. thus, the atmosphere of a warm earth would be dominated by water vapor and carbon dioxide, with a surface pressure nearing 400 bars. several lines of evidence show that the composition of earth’s atmosphere has changed over our planet’s history. scientists can infer the amount of atmospheric oxygen, for example, by studying the chemistry of minerals that formed at various times. we examine this issue in more detail later in this chapter. today we see that co2, h2o, sulfur dioxide (so2), and other gases are released from deeper within earth through the action of volcanoes. (for co2, the primary source today is the burning of fossil fuels, which releases far more co2 than that from volcanic eruptions.) much of this apparently new gas, however, is recycled material that has been subducted through plate tectonics. but where did our planet’s original atmosphere come from?
three possibilities exist for the original source of earth’s atmosphere and oceans: (1) the atmosphere could have been formed with the rest of earth as it accumulated from debris left over from the formation of the sun; (2) it could have been released from the interior through volcanic activity, subsequent to the formation of earth; or (3) it may have been derived from impacts by comets and asteroids from the outer parts of the solar system. current evidence favors a combination of the interior and impact sources. weather and climate all planets with atmospheres have weather, which is the name we give to the circulation of the atmosphere. the energy that powers the weather is derived primarily from the sunlight that heats the surface. both the rotation of the planet and slower seasonal changes cause variations in the amount of sunlight striking different parts of earth. the atmosphere and oceans redistribute the heat from warmer to cooler areas. weather on any planet represents the response of its atmosphere to changing inputs of energy from the sun (see figure 8.13 for a dramatic example). 8.3 • earth’s atmosphere 269 figure 8.13 storm from space. this satellite image shows hurricane irene in 2011, shortly before the storm hit land in new york city.
the combination of earth’s tilted axis of rotation, moderately rapid rotation, and oceans of liquid water can lead to violent weather on our planet. (credit: nasa/noaa goes project) climate is a term used to refer to the effects of the atmosphere that last through decades and centuries. changes in climate (as opposed to the random variations in weather from one year to the next) are often difficult to detect over short time periods, but as they accumulate, their effect can be devastating. one saying is that “climate is what you expect, and weather is what you get.” modern farming is especially sensitive to temperature and rainfall; for example, calculations indicate that a drop of only 2 °c throughout the growing season would cut the wheat production by half in canada and the united states. at the other extreme, an increase of 2 °c in the average temperature of earth would be enough to melt many glaciers, including much of the ice cover of greenland, raising sea level by as much as 10 meters, flooding many coastal cities and ports, and putting small islands completely under water.