to pin down this idea more precisely, recall from the radiation and spectra chapter that we know exactly how light fades with increasing distance. the energy we receive is inversely proportional to the square of the distance. if, for example, we have two stars of the same luminosity and one is twice as far away as the other, it will look four times dimmer than the closer one. if it is three times farther away, it will look nine (three squared) times dimmer, and so forth. alas, the stars do not all have the same luminosity. (actually, we are pretty glad about that because having many different types of stars makes the universe a much more interesting place.) but this means that if a star looks dim in the sky, we cannot tell whether it appears dim because it has a low luminosity but is relatively nearby, or because it has a high luminosity but is very far away. to measure the luminosities of stars, we must first compensate for the dimming effects of distance on light, and to do that, we must know how far away they are. distance is among the most difficult of all astronomical measurements. we will return to how it is determined after we have learned more about the stars.
for now, we will describe how astronomers specify the apparent brightness of stars. the magnitude scale the process of measuring the apparent brightness of stars is called photometry (from the greek photo meaning “light” and –metry meaning “to measure”). as we saw observing the sky: the birth of astronomy, astronomical photometry began with hipparchus. around 150 b.c.e., he erected an observatory on the island of rhodes in the mediterranean. there he prepared a catalog of nearly 1000 stars that included not only their positions but also estimates of their apparent brightnesses. 574 17 • analyzing starlight access for free at openstax.org hipparchus did not have a telescope or any instrument that could measure apparent brightness accurately, so he simply made estimates with his eyes. he sorted the stars into six brightness categories, each of which he called a magnitude. he referred to the brightest stars in his catalog as first-magnitudes stars, whereas those so faint he could barely see them were sixth-magnitude stars. during the nineteenth century, astronomers attempted to make the scale more precise by establishing exactly how much the apparent brightness of a sixth-magnitude star differs from that of a first-magnitude star.
measurements showed that we receive about 100 times more light from a first-magnitude star than from a sixth-magnitude star. based on this measurement, astronomers then defined an accurate magnitude system in which a difference of five magnitudes corresponds exactly to a brightness ratio of 100:1. in addition, the magnitudes of stars are decimalized; for example, a star isn’t just a “second-magnitude star,” it has a magnitude of 2.0 (or 2.1, 2.3, and so forth). so what number is it that, when multiplied together five times, gives you this factor of 100? play on your calculator and see if you can get it. the answer turns out to be about 2.5, which is the fifth root of 100. this means that a magnitude 1.0 star and a magnitude 2.0 star differ in brightness by a factor of about 2.5. likewise, we receive about 2.5 times as much light from a magnitude 2.0 star as from a magnitude 3.0 star. what about the difference between a magnitude 1.0 star and a magnitude 3.0 star?
since the difference is 2.5 times for each “step” of magnitude, the total difference in brightness is 2.5 × 2.5 = 6.25 times. here are a few rules of thumb that might help those new to this system. if two stars differ by 0.75 magnitudes, they differ by a factor of about 2 in brightness. if they are 2.5 magnitudes apart, they differ in brightness by a factor of 10, and a 4-magnitude difference corresponds to a difference in brightness of a factor of 40.you might be saying to yourself at this point, “why do astronomers continue to use this complicated system from more than 2000 years ago?” that’s an excellent question and, as we shall discuss, astronomers today can use other ways of expressing how bright a star looks. but because this system is still used in many books, star charts, and computer apps, we felt we had to introduce students to it (even though we were very tempted to leave it out.) the brightest stars, those that were traditionally referred to as first-magnitude stars, actually turned out (when measured accurately) not to be identical in brightness.