the dust grains are small, and such small particles turn out to scatter light with blue wavelengths more efficiently than light at red wavelengths. a reflection nebula, therefore, usually appears bluer than its illuminating star (figure 20.13). figure 20.13 pleiades star cluster. the bluish light surrounding the stars in this image is an example of a reflection nebula. like fog around a street lamp, a reflection nebula shines only because the dust within it scatters light from a nearby bright source. the pleiades cluster is currently passing through an interstellar cloud that contains dust grains, which scatter the light from the hot blue stars in the cluster. the pleiades cluster is about 400 light-years from the sun. (credit: nasa, esa and aura/caltech) gas and dust are generally intermixed in space, although the proportions are not exactly the same everywhere. the presence of dust is apparent in many photographs of emission nebulae in the constellation of sagittarius, where we see an h ii region surrounded by a blue reflection nebula. which type of nebula appears brighter depends on the kinds of stars that cause the gas and dust to glow.
stars cooler than about 25,000 k have so little ultraviolet radiation of wavelengths shorter than 91.2 nanometers—which is the wavelength required to ionize hydrogen—that the reflection nebulae around such stars outshine the emission nebulae. stars hotter than 25,000 k emit enough ultraviolet energy that the emission nebulae produced around them generally outshine the reflection nebulae. interstellar reddening the tiny interstellar dust grains absorb some of the starlight they intercept. but at least half of the starlight that interacts with a grain is merely scattered, that is, it is redirected rather than absorbed. since neither the 682 20 • between the stars: gas and dust in space access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page700_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page700_img2.jpeg] absorbed nor the scattered starlight reaches us directly, both absorption and scattering make stars look dimmer. the effects of both processes are called interstellar extinction (figure 20.14). astronomers first came to understand interstellar extinction around the early 1930s, as the explanation of a puzzling observation.
in the early part of the twentieth century, astronomers discovered that some stars look red even though their spectral lines indicate that they must be extremely hot (and thus should look blue). the solution to this seeming contradiction turned out to be that the light from these hot stars is not only dimmed but also reddened by interstellar dust, a phenomenon known as interstellar reddening. figure 20.14 barnard 68 in infrared. in this image, we see barnard 68, the same object shown in figure 20.9. the difference is that, in the previous image, the blue, green, and red channels showed light in the visible (or very nearly visible) part of the spectrum. in this image, the red color shows radiation emitted in the infrared at a wavelength of 2.2 microns. interstellar extinction is much smaller at infrared than at visible wavelengths, so the stars behind the cloud become visible in the infrared channel. (credit: eso) dust does not interact with all the colors of light the same way. much of the violet, blue, and green light from these stars has been scattered or absorbed by dust, so it does not reach earth.
some of their orange and red light, with longer wavelengths, on the other hand, more easily penetrates the intervening dust and completes its long journey through space to enter earth-based telescopes (figure 20.15). thus, the star looks redder from earth than it would if you could see it from nearby. (strictly speaking, reddening is not the most accurate term for this process, since no red color is added; instead, blues and related colors are subtracted, so it should more properly be called “deblueing.”) in the most extreme cases, stars can be so reddened that they are entirely undetectable at visible wavelengths and can be seen only at infrared or longer wavelengths (figure 20.14). 20.3 • cosmic dust 683 [image: astronomy_openstax_page701_img1.jpeg] figure 20.15 scattering of light by dust. interstellar dust scatters blue light more efficiently than red light, thereby making distant stars appear redder and giving clouds of dust near stars a bluish hue. here, a red ray of light from a star comes straight through to the observer, whereas a blue ray is shown scattering. a similar scattering process makes earth’s sky look blue.