in september 1938, for example, a meteorite plunged through the roof of edward mccain’s garage, where it became embedded in the seat of his pontiac coupe (figure 14.8). in november 1982, robert and wanda donahue of wethersfield, connecticut, were watching m*a*s*h* on television when a 6-pound meteorite came thundering through their roof, making a hole in the living room ceiling. after bouncing, it finally came to rest under their dining room table. eighteen-year-old michelle knapp of peekskill, new york, got quite a surprise one morning in october 1992. she had just purchased her very first car, her grandmother’s 1980 chevy malibu. but she awoke to find its rear end mangled and a crater in the family driveway—thanks to a 3-pound meteorite. michelle was not sure whether to be devastated by the loss of her car or thrilled by all the media attention.
in june 1994, jose martin and his wife were driving from madrid, spain, to a golfing vacation when a fist- sized meteorite crashed through the windshield of their car, bounced off the dashboard, broke jose’s little finger, and then landed in the back seat. before martin, the most recent person known to have been struck by a meteorite was annie hodges of sylacauga, alabama. in november 1954, she was napping on a couch when a meteorite came through the roof, bounced off a large radio set, and hit her first on the arm and then on the leg. the fireball that exploded at an altitude of about 20 kilometers near the russian city of chelyabinsk on february 15, 2013, produced a very large meteorite shower, and quite a few of the small rocks hit buildings. none is known to have hit people, however, and the individual meteorites were so small that they did not do much damage—much less than the shockwave from the exploding fireball, which broke the glass in thousands of windows. figure 14.8 benld meteorite.
a meteorite (inset) left a hole in the seat cushion of edward mccain’s car. (credit: “shsilver”/wikimedia commons) making connections 14.2 • meteorites: stones from heaven 483 [image: astronomy_openstax_page501_img1.jpeg] meteorite classification the meteorites in our collections have a wide range of compositions and histories, but traditionally they have been placed into three broad classes. first are the irons, composed of nearly pure metallic nickel-iron. second are the stones, the term used for any silicate or rocky meteorite. third are the rarer stony-irons, made (as the name implies) of mixtures of stone and metallic iron (figure 14.9). figure 14.9 meteorite types. (a) this piece of the allende carbonaceous meteorite has white inclusions that may date back to before the formation of the solar nebula. (b) this fragment is from the iron meteorite responsible for the formation of meteor crater in arizona. (c) this piece of the imilac stony-iron meteorite is a beautiful mixture of green olivine crystals and metallic iron.
(credit a: modification of work by james st. john; credit b: modification of work by “taty2007”/wikimedia commons; credit c: modification of work by juan manuel fluxà) of these three types, the irons and stony-irons are the most obviously extraterrestrial because of their metallic content. pure iron almost never occurs naturally on earth; it is generally found here as an oxide (chemically combined with oxygen) or other mineral ore. therefore, if you ever come across a chunk of metallic iron, it is sure to be either human-made or a meteorite. the stones are much more common than the irons but more difficult to recognize. often laboratory analysis is required to demonstrate that a particular sample is really of extraterrestrial origin, especially if it has lain on the ground for some time and been subject to weathering. the most scientifically valuable stones are those collected immediately after they fall, or the antarctic samples preserved in a nearly pristine state by ice. table 14.2 summarizes the frequencies of occurrence of the different classes of meteorites among the fall, find, and antarctic categories.