21.1 • star formation 707 [image: astronomy_openstax_page725_img1.jpeg] figure 21.10 outflows from protostars. these images were taken with the hubble space telescope and show jets flowing outward from newly formed stars. in the hh47 image, a protostar 1500 light-years away (invisible inside a dust disk at the left edge of the image) produces a very complicated jet. the star may actually be wobbling, perhaps because it has a companion. light from the star illuminates the white region at the left because light can emerge perpendicular to the disk (just as the jet does). at right, the jet is plowing into existing clumps of interstellar gas, producing a shock wave that resembles an arrowhead. the hh1/2 image shows a double-beam jet emanating from a protostar (hidden in a dust disk in the center) in the constellation of orion. tip to tip, these jets are more than 1 light-year long. the bright regions (first identified by herbig and haro) are places where the jet is a slamming into a clump of interstellar gas and causing it to glow.
(credit “hh 47”: modification of work by nasa, esa, and p. hartigan (rice university); credit “hh 1 and hh 2: modification of work by j. hester, wfpc2 team, nasa) the james webb space telescope allows astronomers to observe herbig-haro objects in the infrared in unprecedented detail. see this photo release from july 2023 (https://openstax.org/l/30herbigharo1) and this photo release from september 2023 (https://openstax.org/l/30herbigharo2) for some of the first jwst images. the wind from a forming star will ultimately sweep away the material that remains in the obscuring envelope of dust and gas, leaving behind the naked disk and protostar, which can then be seen with visible light. we should note that at this point, the protostar itself is still contracting slowly and has not yet reached the main- sequence stage on the h–r diagram (a concept introduced in the chapter the stars: a celestial census). the disk can be detected directly when observed at infrared wavelengths or when it is seen silhouetted against a bright background (figure 21.11).
link to learning 708 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page726_img1.jpeg] figure 21.11 disks around protostars. these hubble space telescope infrared images show disks around young stars in the constellation of taurus, in a region about 450 light-years away. in some cases, we can see the central star (or stars—some are binaries). in other cases, the dark, horizontal bands indicate regions where the dust disk is so thick that even infrared radiation from the star embedded within it cannot make its way through. the brightly glowing regions are starlight reflected from the upper and lower surfaces of the disk, which are less dense than the central, dark regions. (credit: modification of work by d. padgett (ipac/ caltech), w. brandner (ipac), k. stapelfeldt (jpl) and nasa) this description of a protostar surrounded by a rotating disk of gas and dust sounds very much like what happened in our solar system when the sun and planets formed.
indeed, one of the most important discoveries from the study of star formation in the last decade of the twentieth century was that disks are an inevitable byproduct of the process of creating stars. the next questions that astronomers set out to answer was: will the disks around protostars also form planets? and if so, how often? we will return to these questions later in this chapter. to keep things simple, we have described the formation of single stars. many stars, however, are members of binary or triple systems, where several stars are born together. in this case, the stars form in nearly the same way. widely separated binaries may each have their own disk; close binaries may share a single disk. 21.2 the h–r diagram and the study of stellar evolution learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: one of the best ways to summarize all of these details about how a star or protostar changes with time is to use a hertzsprung-russell (h–r) diagram. recall from the stars: a celestial census that, when looking at an h–r diagram, the temperature (the horizontal axis) is plotted increasing toward the left.