the rotation of earth would carry an observer at any given place alternately into regions of deeper and shallower water. an observer being carried toward the regions under or opposite the moon, where the water was deepest, would say, “the tide is coming in”; when carried away from those regions, the observer would say, “the tide is going out.” during a day, the observer would be carried through two tidal bulges (one on each side of earth) and so would experience two high tides and two low tides. the sun also produces tides on earth, although it is less than half as effective as the moon at tide raising. the actual tides we experience are a combination of the larger effect of the moon and the smaller effect of the sun. when the sun and moon are lined up (at new moon or full moon), the tides produced reinforce each other link to learning 4.6 • ocean tides and the moon 123 [image: astronomy_openstax_page141_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page141_img2.jpeg] and so are greater than normal (figure 4.19).
these are called spring tides (the name is connected not to the season but to the idea that higher tides “spring up”). spring tides are approximately the same, whether the sun and moon are on the same or opposite sides of earth, because tidal bulges occur on both sides. when the moon is at first quarter or last quarter (at right angles to the sun’s direction), the tides produced by the sun partially cancel the tides of the moon, making them lower than usual. these are called neap tides. figure 4.19 tides caused by different alignments of the sun and moon. (a) in spring tides, the sun’s and moon’s pulls reinforce each other. (b) in neap tides, the sun and the moon pull at right angles to each other and the resulting tides are lower than usual. the “simple” theory of tides, described in the preceding paragraphs, would be sufficient if earth rotated very slowly and were completely surrounded by very deep oceans.
however, the presence of land masses stopping the flow of water, the friction in the oceans and between oceans and the ocean floors, the rotation of earth, the wind, the variable depth of the ocean, and other factors all complicate the picture. this is why, in the real world, some places have very small tides while in other places huge tides become tourist attractions. if you have been in such places, you may know that “tide tables” need to be computed and published for each location; one set of tide predictions doesn’t work for the whole planet. in this introductory chapter, we won’t delve further into these complexities. george darwin and the slowing of earth the rubbing of water over the face of earth involves an enormous amount of energy. over long periods of time, the friction of the tides is slowing down the rotation of earth. our day gets longer by about 0.002 second each century. that seems very small, but such tiny changes can add up over millions and billions of years. although earth’s spin is slowing down, the angular momentum (see orbits and gravity) in a system such as the earth-moon system cannot change. thus, some other spin motion must speed up to take the extra angular momentum.
the details of what happens were worked out over a century ago by george darwin, the son of naturalist charles darwin. george darwin (see figure 4.20) had a strong interest in science but studied law for six years and was admitted to the bar. however, he never practiced law, returning to science instead and eventually becoming a professor at cambridge university. he was a protégé of lord kelvin, one of the great physicists of the nineteenth century, and he became interested in the long-term evolution of the solar system. he specialized in making detailed (and difficult) mathematical calculations of how orbits and motions change over geologic time. voyagers in astronomy 124 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page142_img1.jpeg] figure 4.20 george darwin (1845–1912). george darwin is best known for studying earth’s spin in relation to angular momentum. what darwin calculated for the earth-moon system was that the moon will slowly spiral outward, away from earth. as it moves farther away, it will orbit less quickly (just as planets farther from the sun move more slowly in their orbits).