as the altitude increases the temperature drops steadily again. • thermosphere – this is the level of the atmosphere that is the upper limit of where the atoms in the air behave like an atmosphere. satellites in low earth orbit, including the international space station, are in this region. it extends from 85 to 600 km. temperatures in this level rise as the altitude rises up to about 200 km. above that altitude, the temperature remains constant at approximately 825 k • exosphere – this is the outmost layer of the atmosphere. this is where the materials of the atmosphere merge with the materials of interplanetary space. gases in this level are mostly hydrogen with some helium, carbon dioxide, and atomic oxygen. it extends from 600 to 10,000 km. the ionosphere the ionosphere is a part of the atmosphere where solar radiation ionizes atoms in the atmosphere. it extends from 60 to 1000 km. it encompasses the upper level of the mesosphere, the thermosphere, and into the exosphere. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 138 figure 170a: sunlight with no atmosphere figure 170b: scattering from atmosphere cycles convection. the air in the troposphere is in constant motion.
warm air rises and cool air falls. land and water absorb heat during the day and radiate it back at night. moist air behaves differently than dry air. these movements are responsible for the winds. the water cycle. water on the earth’s surface and in the earth’s atmosphere is constantly being recycled. water in the oceans and lakes evaporates and becomes water vapor in the atmosphere. this forms into clouds and returns water to the earth in the form of rain or snow. the snow melts and this water with the rain returns to the oceans through rivers and streams. rayleigh scattering molecules and dust in the atmosphere scatter light. as the frequency increases, the scattering also increases. the sky is blue. sunlight enters the earth’s atmosphere where dust and molecules tend to scatter the bluer light. in the direction of the sun, we see the non-scattered light which is missing the blue components and so appears yellowish. in other directions we see blue light that is scattered by the dust and molecules from other light (see figure ). the sun is yellow. this is why the sun appears to be yellow. with the blue light missing, the combination of the remaining wavelengths appears yellow.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page138_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page138_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 139 figure 105: red sunrise photo by moise nicu the red sun, moon and sky. the moon and sun, when they are near the horizon, are often red. and often the clouds near the horizon will appear red. this is due to the greater amount of atmosphere through which the light must travel to reach the observer. the thicker atmosphere will scatter more light, resulting in mostly red light reaching the observer. greenhouse effect a planet’s atmosphere receives energy from the sun. some of the sunlight is reflected back into space by clouds. some of the light will reach the earth and will heat the land and water. the land and water will then reradiate this heat back towards space as infrared radiation. certain gases present in the earth’s atmosphere will trap heat trying to leave the earth. this effect is what makes our day to night temperature changes reasonable and makes the earth a good place to live. this is called the greenhouse effect. excessive amounts of water vapor and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere make the atmosphere retain more heat. this is called a runaway greenhouse effect.
this will raise the average temperature on earth and will cause changes to life on earth. the balance of energy that the earth receives and the amount it radiates into space is called the earth’s energy budget. figure 106 represents this budget and how the energy is distributed. some of the results of this greenhouse effect are: • weather extremes: there will be more time when the weather will vary from the historical norm. times will be hotter, and times will actually be colder. the swings will become more severe. we will have more droughts and also more rain from severe thunderstorms, hurricanes and tornados. deserts will enlarge and extend further from the equator. • glaciers will melt: as the average temperature rises, the glaciers will melt and recede. this additional water will change the salinity in parts of the oceans and will cause the ocean levels to rise causing major coastal flooding. • vegetation will change: as temperatures rise, vegetation will need to adjust. some plants will move farther from the equator and to higher latitudes. there will be massive crop failures.