gaia is also able to measure proper motions2 for thousands of stars in the halo of the milky way—something that can only be done for the brightest stars right now. at the end of gaia’s mission, we will not only have a three-dimensional map of a large fraction of our own milky way galaxy, but we will also have a strong link in the chain of cosmic distances that we are discussing in this chapter. yet, to extend this chain beyond gaia’s reach and explore distances to nearby galaxies, we need some completely new techniques. 2 proper motion (as discussed in analyzing starlight, is the motion of a star across the sky (perpendicular to our line of sight.) 648 19 • celestial distances access for free at openstax.org figure 19.8 h–r diagram of stars measured by gaia and hipparcos. this plot includes 16,631 stars for which the parallaxes have an accuracy of 10% or better. the colors indicate the numbers of stars at each point of the diagram, with red corresponding to the largest number and blue to the lowest. luminosity is plotted along the vertical axis, with luminosity increasing upward.
an infrared color is plotted as a proxy for temperature, with temperature decreasing to the right. most of the data points are distributed along the diagonal running from the top left corner (high luminosity, high temperature) to the bottom right (low temperature, low luminosity). these are main sequence stars. the large clump of data points above the main sequence on the right side of the diagram is composed of red giant stars. (credit: modification of work by the european space agency) parallax and space astronomy one of the most difficult things about precisely measuring the tiny angles of parallax shifts from earth is that you have to observe the stars through our planet’s atmosphere. as we saw in astronomical instruments, the effect of the atmosphere is to spread out the points of starlight into fuzzy disks, making exact measurements of their positions more difficult. astronomers had long dreamed of being able to measure parallaxes from space, and two orbiting observatories have now turned this dream into reality. the name of the hipparcos satellite, launched in 1989 by the european space agency, is both an abbreviation for high precision parallax collecting satellite and a tribute to hipparchus, the pioneering greek astronomer whose work we discussed in the observing the sky: the birth of astronomy.
the satellite was designed to make the most accurate parallax measurements in history, from 36,000 kilometers above earth. however, its onboard rocket motor failed to fire, which meant it did not get the needed boost to reach the desired altitude. hipparcos ended up spending its 4-year life in an elliptical orbit that varied from making connections 19.2 • surveying the stars 649 [image: astronomy_openstax_page667_img1.jpeg] 500 to 36,000 kilometers high. in this orbit, the satellite plunged into earth’s radiation belts every 5 hours or so, which finally took its toll on the solar panels that provided energy to power the instruments. nevertheless, the mission was successful, resulting in two catalogs. one gives positions of 120,000 stars to an accuracy of one-thousandth of an arcsecond—about the diameter of a golf ball in new york as viewed from europe. the second catalog contains information for more than a million stars, whose positions have been measured to thirty-thousandths of an arcsecond. we thus made accurate parallax measurements of stars out to distances of about 300 light-years.
(with ground-based telescopes, accurate measurements were feasible out to only about 60 light-years.) in order to build on the success of hipparcos, in 2013, the european space agency launched a new satellite called gaia. because gaia carries larger telescopes than hipparcos, it can observe fainter stars and measure their positions 200 times more accurately. the main goal of the gaia mission is to make an accurate three- dimensional map of that portion of the galaxy within about 30,000 light-years by observing 1 billion stars 70 times each, measuring their positions and hence their parallaxes as well as their brightnesses. for a long time, the measurement of parallaxes and accurate stellar positions was a backwater of astronomical research—mainly because the accuracy of measurements did not improve much for about 100 years. however, the ability to make measurements from space has revolutionized this field of astronomy and will continue to provide a critical link in our chain of cosmic distances. the european space agency (esa) maintains a gaia mission website (https://openstax.org/l/30gaiamission) where you can learn more about the gaia mission and to get the latest news on gaia observations.