do you find it more appealing philosophically than the big bang model? can you cite some evidence that indicates that the universe was not the same billions of years ago as it is now—that it is not in a steady state? c. one of the lucky accidents that characterizes our universe is the fact that the time scale for the development of intelligent life on earth and the lifetime of the sun are comparable. have your group discuss what would happen if the two time scales were very different. suppose, for example, that the time for intelligent life to evolve was 10 times greater than the main-sequence lifetime of the sun. would our civilization have ever developed? now suppose the time for intelligent life to evolve is ten times shorter than the main-sequence lifetime of the sun. would we be around? (this latter discussion requires considerable thought, including such ideas as what the early stages in the sun’s life were like and how 29 • collaborative group activities 1051 much the early earth was bombarded by asteroids and comets.) d. the grand ideas discussed in this chapter have a powerful effect on the human imagination, not just for scientists, but also for artists, composers, dramatists, and writers.
here we list just a few of these responses to cosmology. each member of your group can select one of these, learn more about it, and then report back, either to the group or to the whole class. ◦ the california poet robinson jeffers was the brother of an astronomer who worked at the lick observatory. his poem “margrave” is a meditation on cosmology and on the kidnap and murder of a child: http://www.poemhunter.com/best-poems/robinson-jeffers/margrave/. ◦ in the science fiction story “the gravity mine” by stephen baxter, the energy of evaporating supermassive black holes is the last hope of living beings in the far future in an ever-expanding universe. the story has poetic description of the ultimate fate of matter and life and is available online at: http://www.infinityplus.co.uk/stories/gravitymine.htm. ◦ the musical piece ylem by karlheinz stockhausen takes its title from the ancient greek term for primeval material revived by george gamow. it tries to portray the oscillating universe in musical terms.
players actually expand through the concert hall, just as the universe does, and then return and expand again. see: http://www.karlheinzstockhausen.org/ylem_english.htm. ◦ the musical piece supernova sonata http://www.astro.uvic.ca/~alexhp/new/supernova_sonata.html by alex parker and melissa graham is based on the characteristics of 241 type ia supernova explosions, the ones that have helped astronomers discover the acceleration of the expanding universe. ◦ gregory benford’s short story “the final now” envisions the end of an accelerating open universe, and blends religious and scientific imagery in a very poetic way. available free online at: http://www.tor.com/ stories/2010/03/the-final-now. e. when einstein learned about hubble’s work showing that the universe of galaxies is expanding, he called his introduction of the cosmological constant into his general theory of relativity his “biggest blunder.” can your group think of other “big blunders” from the history of astronomy, where the thinking of astronomers was too conservative and the universe turned out to be more complicated or required more “outside-the-box” thinking?
exercises review questions 1. what are the basic observations about the universe that any theory of cosmology must explain? 2. describe some possible futures for the universe that scientists have come up with. what property of the universe determines which of these possibilities is the correct one? 3. what does the term hubble time mean in cosmology, and what is the current best calculation for the hubble time? 4. which formed first: hydrogen nuclei or hydrogen atoms? explain the sequence of events that led to each. 5. describe at least two characteristics of the universe that are explained by the standard big bang model. 6. describe two properties of the universe that are not explained by the standard big bang model (without inflation). how does inflation explain these two properties? 7. why do astronomers believe there must be dark matter that is not in the form of atoms with protons and neutrons? 8. what is dark energy and what evidence do astronomers have that it is an important component of the universe? 9.