as stars evolve, they become redder. the bright orange star in ngc 3293 is the member of the cluster that has evolved most rapidly. (credit: eso/g. beccari) figure 22.12 shows the h–r diagram of the open cluster m41, which is roughly 100 million years old; by this time, a significant number of stars have moved off to the right and become red giants. note the gap that appears in this h–r diagram between the stars near the main sequence and the red giants. a gap does not necessarily imply that stars avoid a region of certain temperatures and luminosities. in this case, it simply represents a domain of temperature and luminosity through which stars evolve very quickly. we see a gap for m41 because at this particular moment, we have not caught a star in the process of scurrying across this part of the diagram. figure 22.12 cluster m41. (a) cluster m41 is older than ngc 2264 (see figure 22.10) and contains several red giants. some of its more massive stars are no longer close to the zero-age main sequence (red line). (b) this ground-based photograph shows the open cluster m41.
note that it contains several orange-color stars. these are stars that have exhausted hydrogen in their centers, and 754 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page772_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page772_img2.jpeg] have swelled up to become red giants. (credit b: modification of work by noao/aura/nsf) h–r diagrams of older clusters after 4 billion years have passed, many more stars, including stars that are only a few times more massive than the sun, have left the main sequence (figure 22.13). this means that no stars are left near the top of the main sequence; only the low-mass stars near the bottom remain. the older the cluster, the lower the point on the main sequence (and the lower the mass of the stars) where stars begin to move toward the red giant region. the location in the h–r diagram where the stars have begun to leave the main sequence is called the main-sequence turnoff. figure 22.13 h–r diagram for an older cluster.
we see the h–r diagram for a hypothetical older cluster at an age of 4.24 billion years. note that most of the stars on the upper part of the main sequence have turned off toward the red-giant region. and the most massive stars in the cluster have already died and are no longer on the diagram. the oldest clusters of all are the globular clusters. figure 22.14 shows the h–r diagram of globular cluster 47 tucanae. notice that the luminosity and temperature scales are different from those of the other h–r diagrams in this chapter. in figure 22.13, for example, the luminosity scale on the left side of the diagram goes from 0.1 to 100,000 times the sun’s luminosity. but in figure 22.14, the luminosity scale has been significantly reduced in extent. so many stars in this old cluster have had time to turn off the main sequence that only the very bottom of the main sequence remains. 22.3 • checking out the theory 755 [image: astronomy_openstax_page773_img1.jpeg] figure 22.14 cluster 47 tucanae.
this h–r diagram is for the globular cluster 47. note that the scale of luminosity differs from that of the other h–r diagrams in this chapter. we are only focusing on the lower portion of the main sequence, the only part where stars still remain in this old cluster. check out this brief nasa video with a 3-d visualization (https://openstax.org/l/30hrdiagram) of how an h–r diagram is created for the globular cluster omega centauri. just how old are the different clusters we have been discussing? to get their actual ages (in years), we must compare the appearances of our calculated h–r diagrams of different ages to observed h–r diagrams of real clusters. in practice, astronomers use the position at the top of the main sequence (that is, the luminosity at which stars begin to move off the main sequence to become red giants) as a measure of the age of a cluster (the main-sequence turnoff we discussed previously). for example, we can compare the luminosities of the brightest stars that are still on the main sequence in figure 22.10 and figure 22.13.