link to learning 18.4 • the h–r diagram 627 [image: astronomy_openstax_page645_img1.jpeg] key terms binary stars two stars that revolve about each other brown dwarf an object intermediate in size between a planet and a star; the approximate mass range is from about 1/100 of the mass of the sun up to the lower mass limit for self-sustaining nuclear reactions, which is about 1/12 the mass of the sun eclipsing binary a binary star in which the plane of revolution of the two stars is nearly edge-on to our line of sight, so that the light of one star is periodically diminished by the other passing in front of it h–r diagram (hertzsprung–russell diagram) a plot of luminosity against surface temperature (or spectral type) for a group of stars main sequence a sequence of stars on the hertzsprung–russell diagram, containing the majority of stars, that runs diagonally from the upper left to the lower right mass-luminosity relation the observed relation between the masses and luminosities of many (90% of all) stars selection effect the selection of sample data in a nonrandom way, causing the sample data to be unrepresentative of the entire data set spectroscopic binary a binary star in which the components are not resolved but whose binary nature is indicated by periodic variations in radial velocity, indicating orbital motion visual binary a binary star in which the two components are telescopically resolved white dwarf a low-mass star that has exhausted most or all of its nuclear fuel and has collapsed to a very small size; such a star is near its final state of life summary 18.1 a stellar census to understand the properties of stars, we must make wide-ranging surveys.
we find the stars that appear brightest to our eyes are bright primarily because they are intrinsically very luminous, not because they are the closest to us. most of the nearest stars are intrinsically so faint that they can be seen only with the aid of a telescope. stars with low mass and low luminosity are much more common than stars with high mass and high luminosity. most of the brown dwarfs in the local neighborhood have not yet been discovered. 18.2 measuring stellar masses the masses of stars can be determined by analysis of the orbit of binary stars—two stars that orbit a common center of mass. in visual binaries, the two stars can be seen separately in a telescope, whereas in a spectroscopic binary, only the spectrum reveals the presence of two stars. stellar masses range from about 1/ 12 to more than 100 times the mass of the sun (in rare cases, going to 250 times the sun’s mass). objects with masses between 1/12 and 1/100 that of the sun are called brown dwarfs. objects in which no nuclear reactions can take place are planets.
the most massive stars are, in most cases, also the most luminous, and this correlation is known as the mass-luminosity relation. 18.3 diameters of stars the diameters of stars can be determined by measuring the time it takes an object (the moon, a planet, or a companion star) to pass in front of it and block its light. diameters of members of eclipsing binary systems (where the stars pass in front of each other) can be determined through analysis of their orbital motions. 18.4 the h–r diagram the hertzsprung–russell diagram, or h–r diagram, is a plot of stellar luminosity against surface temperature. most stars lie on the main sequence, which extends diagonally across the h–r diagram from high temperature and high luminosity to low temperature and low luminosity. the position of a star along the main sequence is determined by its mass. high-mass stars emit more energy and are hotter than low-mass stars on the main 628 18 • key terms access for free at openstax.org sequence. main-sequence stars derive their energy from the fusion of protons to helium. about 90% of the stars lie on the main sequence.