and it can lose still more mass when it ascends the red-giant branch for the second time. as a result, aging stars are surrounded by one or more expanding shells of gas, each containing as much as 10–20% of the sun’s mass (or 0.1–0.2 msun). when nuclear energy generation in the carbon-oxygen core ceases, the star’s core begins to shrink again and to heat up as it gets more and more compressed. (remember that this compression will not be halted by another type of fusion in these low-mass stars.) the whole star follows along, shrinking and also becoming very hot—reaching surface temperatures as high as 100,000 k. such hot stars are very strong sources of stellar winds and ultraviolet radiation, which sweep outward into the shells of material ejected when the star was a red giant. the winds and the ultraviolet radiation heat the shells, ionize them, and set them aglow (just as ultraviolet radiation from hot, young stars produces h ii regions; see between the stars: gas and dust in space).
the result is the creation of some of the most beautiful objects in the cosmos (see the gallery in figure 22.18 and figure 22.1). these objects were given an extremely misleading name when first found in the eighteenth century: planetary nebulae. the name is derived from the fact that a few planetary nebulae, when viewed through a small telescope, have a round shape bearing a superficial resemblance to planets. actually, they have nothing to do with planets, but once names are put into regular use in astronomy, it is extremely difficult to change them. there are tens of thousands of planetary nebulae in our own galaxy, although many are hidden from view because their light is absorbed by interstellar dust. 2 recall that the force of gravity depends not only on the mass doing the pulling, but also on our distance from the center of gravity. as a red giant star gets a lot bigger, a point on the surface of the star is now farther from the center, and thus has less gravity. that’s why the speed needed to escape the star goes down. 22.4 • further evolution of stars 761 figure 22.18 gallery of planetary nebulae.
this series of beautiful images depicting some intriguing planetary nebulae highlights the capabilities of the hubble space telescope. (a) perhaps the best known planetary nebula is the ring nebula (m57), located about 2000 light-years away in the constellation of lyra. the ring is about 1 light-year in diameter, and the central star has a temperature of about 120,000 °c. careful study of this image has shown scientists that, instead of looking at a spherical shell around this dying star, we may be looking down the barrel of a tube or cone. the blue region shows emission from very hot helium, which is located very close to the star; the red region isolates emission from ionized nitrogen, which is radiated by the coolest gas farthest from the star; and the green region represents oxygen emission, which is produced at intermediate temperatures and is at an intermediate distance from the star. (b) this planetary nebula, m2-9, is an example of a butterfly nebula. the central star (which is part of a binary system) has ejected mass preferentially in two opposite directions. in other images, a disk, perpendicular to the two long streams of gas, can be seen around the two stars in the middle.
the stellar outburst that resulted in the expulsion of matter occurred about 1200 years ago. neutral oxygen is shown in red, once-ionized nitrogen in green, and twice-ionized oxygen in blue. the planetary nebula is about 2100 light-years away in the constellation of ophiuchus. (c) in this image of the planetary nebula ngc 6751, the blue regions mark the hottest gas, which forms a ring around the central star. the orange and red regions show the locations of cooler gas. the origin of these cool streamers is not known, but their shapes indicate that they are affected by radiation and stellar winds from the hot star at the center. the temperature of the star is about 140,000 °c. the diameter of the nebula is about 600 times larger than the diameter of our solar system. the nebula is about 6500 light-years away in the constellation of aquila. (d) this image of the planetary nebula ngc 7027 shows several stages of mass loss. the faint blue concentric shells surrounding the central region identify the mass that was shed slowly from the surface of the star when it became a red giant.