it has sunspots and solar flares that are larger than the earth. the earth is an average 93,000,000 miles from the sun. this is called an au (astronomical unit). the diameter of the earth’s orbit is 186,000,000 miles. the solar system. everything that is affected by the sun is part of the solar system. this includes all of the planets, moons, asteroids, comets, meteoroids, dust, and gas that are close enough to the sun to be effected by the sun’s gravity. this region extends nearly 2 light-years out from the sun. this is 1.175699962 x 1013 miles or about 12 trillion miles. nearest stellar neighbor. the sun’s nearest neighbor is proxima centauri. this is a small red dwarf star that is 4.243 light-years away. it is part of the alpha centauri multiple-star system. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page17_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 18 figure 3: local stellar neighborhood – 30 light-years diameter drawing by inductiveload the local stellar neighborhood.
the limit on how far the local neighborhood extends is not well defined. 30 light-years diameter is a reasonable limit. figure 3 shows the plane of our solar system extended outward 15 light-years. the red lines drawn to the stars extend outward from the sun and then either upwards or downwards to represent their height above or below that plane. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page18_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 19 figure 4: the milky way galaxy figure 5: andromeda galaxy stars in the neighborhood. the stars in the sun’s neighborhood can be found in appendix 5 – the sun’s stellar neighborhood. the nearest star is proxima centauri. the milky way galaxy. our local galaxy is called the milky way. it is roughly 100,000 light-years in diameter. the yellow arrow in figure 4 points to the location of the sun. the milky way galaxy has a number of smaller companion galaxies. these galaxies orbit the milky way. andromeda galaxy. our nearest large galactic neighbor is the andromeda galaxy. it is located 2.4 million light-years away.
the andromeda galaxy has many more companion galaxies than the milky way. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page19_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page19_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 20 figure 7: the local galaxy group drawing by andrew z. colvin figure 6: virgo supercluster drawing by andrew z. colvin the local galaxy group. the andromeda galaxy and the milky way galaxy plus all of the companion galaxies comprise the local group. its diameter is 10 million light-years and it is composed of 54 galaxies. in figure 7, members of the local galaxy group are shown. the blue ovals represent distances in the plane of the milky way galaxy and the lines represent the distance to the other galaxies in the plane and also above and below that plane. the local galaxy group consists of three spiral galaxies: the milky way, andromeda, and m33. there are also many irregular galaxies and elliptical galaxies. the virgo supercluster. the local group of galaxies is part of the virgo supercluster. the supercluster is defined as the local space out to 110 million light-years.
it contains over 100 galaxy groups and clusters. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page20_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page20_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 21 figure 8: the local supercluster drawing by klaus dolag figure 9: the universe the local galaxy supercluster. the local supercluster of galaxies is the laniakea supercluster. its diameter is 520 million light-years and is composed of over 100,000 galaxies. the milky way galaxy is part of one section of the supercluster called the virgo supercluster. the universe. as we gaze out into the far reaches of space we run into a problem. the further out we look, the farther back in time we are looking. it is not possible to get a true picture of what the universe actually looks like. we are able to look at galaxies and structures, but there is a limit to how far we can see. we also do not know how big the universe is. we know that it is larger than the portion that we are able to see. figure 9 represents a piece of the universe.