this leads to more fusion in the shell of fresh hydrogen outside the core (figure 22.2). the additional fusion produces still more energy, which also flows out into the upper layer of the star. 744 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org figure 22.2 star layers during and after the main sequence. (a) during the main sequence, a star has a core where fusion takes place and a much larger envelope that is too cold for fusion. (b) when the hydrogen in the core is exhausted (made of helium, not hydrogen), the core is compressed by gravity and heats up. the additional heat starts hydrogen fusion in a layer just outside the core. note that these parts of the sun are not drawn to scale. most stars actually generate more energy each second when they are fusing hydrogen in the shell surrounding the helium core than they did when hydrogen fusion was confined to the central part of the star; thus, they increase in luminosity. with all the new energy pouring outward, the outer layers of the star begin to expand, and the star eventually grows and grows until it reaches enormous proportions (figure 22.3). figure 22.3 relative sizes of stars.
this image compares the size of the sun to that of delta boötis, a giant star, and xi cygni, a supergiant. note that xi cygni is so large in comparison to the other two stars that only a small portion of it is visible at the top of the frame. when you take the lid off a pot of boiling water, the steam can expand and it cools down. in the same way, the expansion of a star’s outer layers causes the temperature at the surface to decrease. as it cools, the star’s overall color becomes redder. (we saw in radiation and spectra that a red color corresponds to cooler temperature.) so the star becomes simultaneously more luminous and cooler. on the h–r diagram, the star therefore leaves the main-sequence band and moves upward (brighter) and to the right (cooler surface temperature). over time, massive stars become red supergiants, and lower-mass stars like the sun become red giants. (we first discussed such giant stars in the stars: a celestial census; here we see how such “swollen” stars originate.) you might also say that these stars have “split personalities”: their cores are contracting while their outer layers are expanding.
(note that red giant stars do not actually look deep red; their colors are more like orange or orange-red.) just how different are these red giants and supergiants from a main-sequence star? table 22.2 compares the sun with the red supergiant betelgeuse, which is visible above orion’s belt as the bright red star that marks the hunter’s armpit. relative to the sun, this supergiant has a much larger radius, a much lower average density, a cooler surface, and a much hotter core.
22.1 • evolution from the main sequence to red giants 745 [image: astronomy_openstax_page763_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page763_img2.jpeg] comparing a supergiant with the sun property sun betelgeuse mass 1 16 radius (km) 700,000 500,000,000 surface temperature (k) 5,800 3,600 core temperature (k) 15,000,000 160,000,000 luminosity 1 46,000 average density (g/cm3) 1.4 age (millions of years) 4,500 10 table 22.2 red giants can become so large that if we were to replace the sun with one of them, its outer atmosphere would extend to the orbit of mars or even beyond (figure 22.4). this is the next stage in the life of a star as it moves (to continue our analogy to human lives) from its long period of “youth” and “adulthood” to “old age.” by considering the relative ages of the sun and betelgeuse, we can also see that the idea that “bigger stars die faster” is indeed true here.