the atmosphere, weighing down upon earth’s surface under the force of gravity, exerts a pressure at sea level that scientists define as 1 bar (a term that comes from the same root as barometer, an instrument used to measure atmospheric pressure). a bar of pressure means that each square centimeter of earth’s surface has a weight equivalent to 1.03 kilograms pressing down on it. humans have evolved to live at this pressure; make the pressure a lot lower or higher and we do not function well. the total mass of earth’s atmosphere is about 5 × 1018 kilograms. this sounds like a large number, but it is only about a millionth of the total mass of earth. the atmosphere represents a smaller fraction of earth than the fraction of your mass represented by the hair on your head. structure of the atmosphere the structure of the atmosphere is illustrated in figure 8.12. most of the atmosphere is concentrated near the surface of earth, within about the bottom 10 kilometers where clouds form and airplanes fly. within this region—called the troposphere—warm air, heated by the surface, rises and is replaced by descending currents of cooler air; this is an example of convection. this circulation generates clouds and wind.
within the troposphere, temperature decreases rapidly with increasing elevation to values near 50 °c below freezing at its upper boundary, where the stratosphere begins. most of the stratosphere, which extends to about 50 kilometers above the surface, is cold and free of clouds. differentiate between earth’s various atmospheric layers describe the chemical composition and possible origins of our atmosphere explain the difference between weather and climate 8.3 • earth’s atmosphere 267 figure 8.12 structure of earth’s atmosphere. height increases up the left side of the diagram, and the names of the different atmospheric layers are shown at the right. in the upper ionosphere, ultraviolet radiation from the sun can strip electrons from their atoms, leaving the atmosphere ionized. the curving red line shows the temperature (see the scale on the x-axis). near the top of the stratosphere is a layer of ozone (o3), a form of oxygen with three atoms per molecule instead of the usual two. because ozone is a good absorber of ultraviolet light, it protects the surface from some of the sun’s dangerous ultraviolet radiation, making it possible for life to exist on earth.
the breakup of ozone adds heat to the stratosphere, reversing the decreasing temperature trend in the troposphere. because ozone is essential to our survival, we reacted with justifiable concern to evidence that became clear in the 1980s that atmospheric ozone was being destroyed by human activities. by international agreement, the production of industrial chemicals that cause ozone depletion, called chlorofluorocarbons, or cfcs, has been phased out. as a result, ozone loss has stopped and the “ozone hole” over the antarctic is shrinking gradually. this is an example of how concerted international action can help maintain the habitability of earth. visit nasa’s scientific visualization studio for a short video (https://openstax.org/l/302065regcfc) of what would have happened to earth’s ozone layer by 2065 if cfcs had not been regulated. at heights above 100 kilometers, the atmosphere is so thin that orbiting satellites can pass through it with very little friction. many of the atoms are ionized by the loss of an electron, and this region is often called the ionosphere. at these elevations, individual atoms can occasionally escape completely from the gravitational field of earth.
there is a continuous, slow leaking of atmosphere—especially of lightweight atoms, which move faster than heavy ones. earth’s atmosphere cannot, for example, hold on for long to hydrogen or helium, which escape into space. earth is not the only planet to experience atmosphere leakage. atmospheric leakage also created mars’ thin atmosphere. venus’ dry atmosphere evolved because its proximity to the sun vaporized and dissociated any water, with the component gases lost to space. atmospheric composition and origin at earth’s surface, the atmosphere consists of 78% nitrogen (n2), 21% oxygen (o2), and 1% argon (ar), with traces of water vapor (h2o), carbon dioxide (co2), and other gases. variable amounts of dust particles and link to learning 268 8 • earth as a planet access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page286_img1.jpeg] water droplets are also found suspended in the air. a complete census of earth’s volatile materials, however, should look at more than the gas that is now present. volatile materials are those that evaporate at a relatively low temperature.