another example of the conservation of angular momentum is a shrinking cloud of dust or a star collapsing on itself (both are situations that you will learn about as you read on). as material moves to a lesser distance from the spin center, the speed of the material increases to conserve angular momentum. figure 3.8 conservation of angular momentum. when a spinning figure skater brings in her arms, their distance from her spin center is smaller, so her speed increases. when her arms are out, their distance from the spin center is greater, so she slows down. 3.3 newton’s universal law of gravitation learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: newton’s laws of motion show that objects at rest will stay at rest and those in motion will continue moving uniformly in a straight line unless acted upon by a force. thus, it is the straight line that defines the most natural state of motion. but the planets move in ellipses, not straight lines; therefore, some force must be bending their paths. that force, newton proposed, was gravity. in newton’s time, gravity was something associated with earth alone. everyday experience shows us that earth exerts a gravitational force upon objects at its surface.
if you drop something, it accelerates toward earth as it falls. newton’s insight was that earth’s gravity might extend as far as the moon and produce the force required to curve the moon’s path from a straight line and keep it in its orbit. he further hypothesized that gravity is not limited to earth, but that there is a general force of attraction between all material bodies. if so, the attractive force between the sun and each of the planets could keep them in their orbits. (this may seem part of our everyday thinking today, but it was a remarkable insight in newton’s time.) once newton boldly hypothesized that there was a universal attraction among all bodies everywhere in space, he had to determine the exact nature of the attraction. the precise mathematical description of that gravitational force had to dictate that the planets move exactly as kepler had described them to (as expressed in kepler’s three laws). also, that gravitational force had to predict the correct behavior of falling bodies on earth, as observed by galileo. how must the force of gravity depend on distance in order for these conditions to be met?
the answer to this question required mathematical tools that had not yet been developed, but this did not explain what determines the strength of gravity describe how newton’s universal law of gravitation extends our understanding of kepler’s laws 80 3 • orbits and gravity access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page98_img1.jpeg] deter isaac newton, who invented what we today call calculus to deal with this problem. eventually he was able to conclude that the magnitude of the force of gravity must decrease with increasing distance between the sun and a planet (or between any two objects) in proportion to the inverse square of their separation. in other words, if a planet were twice as far from the sun, the force would be , or as large. put the planet three times farther away, and the force is , or as large. newton also concluded that the gravitational attraction between two bodies must be proportional to their masses. the more mass an object has, the stronger the pull of its gravitational force.
the gravitational attraction between any two objects is therefore given by one of the most famous equations in all of science: where fgravity is the gravitational force between two objects, m1 and m2 are the masses of the two objects, and r is their separation. g is a constant number known as the universal gravitational constant, and the equation itself symbolically summarizes newton’s universal law of gravitation. with such a force and the laws of motion, newton was able to show mathematically that the only orbits permitted were exactly those described by kepler’s laws. newton’s universal law of gravitation works for the planets, but is it really universal? the gravitational theory should also predict the observed acceleration of the moon toward earth as it orbits earth, as well as of any object (say, an apple) dropped near earth’s surface. the falling of an apple is something we can measure quite easily, but can we use it to predict the motions of the moon? recall that according to newton’s second law, forces cause acceleration. newton’s universal law of gravitation says that the force acting upon (and therefore the acceleration of) an object toward earth should be inversely proportional to the square of its distance from the center of earth.