the sun, as it expands, will swallow mercury and venus, and friction with our star’s outer atmosphere will make these planets spiral inward until they are completely vaporized. it is not completely clear whether earth will escape a similar fate. as described in this chapter, the sun will lose some of its mass as it becomes a red giant. the gravitational pull of the sun decreases when it loses mass. the result would be that the diameter of earth’s orbit would increase (remember kepler’s third law). however, recent calculations also show that forces due to the tides raised on the sun by earth will act in the opposite direction, causing earth’s orbit to shrink. thus, many astrophysicists conclude that earth will be vaporized along with mercury and venus. whether or not this dire prediction is true, there is little doubt that all life on earth will surely be incinerated. but don’t lose any sleep over this—we are talking about events that will occur billions of years from now. what then are the prospects for preserving earth life as we know it? the first strategy you might think of would be to move humanity to a more distant and cooler planet.
however, calculations indicate that there are long periods of time (several hundred million years) when no planet is habitable. for example, earth becomes far too warm for life long before mars warms up enough. a better alternative may be to move the entire earth progressively farther from the sun. the idea is to use gravity in the same way nasa has used it to send spacecraft to distant planets. when a spacecraft flies near a planet, the planet’s motion can be used to speed up the spacecraft, slow it down, or redirect it. calculations show that if we were to redirect an asteroid so that it follows just the right orbit between earth and jupiter, it could transfer orbital energy from jupiter to earth and move earth slowly outward, pulling us away from the expanding sun on each flyby. since we have hundreds of millions of years to change earth’s orbit, the effect of each flyby need not be large. (of course, the people directing the asteroid had better get the orbit exactly right and not cause the asteroid to hit earth.) it may seem crazy to think about projects to move an entire planet to a different orbit. but remember that we are talking about the distant future.
if, by some miracle, human beings are able to get along for all that time and don’t blow ourselves to bits, our technology is likely to be far more sophisticated than it is today. it may also be that if humans survive for hundreds of millions of years, we may spread to planets or habitats around other stars. indeed, earth, by then, might be a museum world to which youngsters from other planets return to learn about the origin of our species. it is also possible that evolution will by then have changed us in ways that allow us to survive in very different environments. wouldn’t it be exciting to see how the story of the human race turns out after all those billions of years? 22.5 the evolution of more massive stars learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: if what we have described so far were the whole story of the evolution of stars and elements, we would have a big problem on our hands. we will see in later chapters that in our best models of the first few minutes of the universe, everything starts with the two simplest elements—hydrogen and helium (plus a tiny bit of lithium).
explain how and why massive stars evolve much more rapidly than lower-mass stars like our sun discuss the origin of the elements heavier than carbon within stars explain why the chemical composition of globular clusters is different from that of open clusters 22.5 • the evolution of more massive stars 765 all the predictions of the models imply that no heavier elements were produced at the beginning of the universe. yet when we look around us on earth, we see lots of other elements besides hydrogen and helium. these elements must have been made (fused) somewhere in the universe, and the only place hot enough to make them is inside stars. one of the fundamental discoveries of twentieth-century astronomy is that the stars are the source of most of the chemical richness that characterizes our world and our lives. we have already seen that carbon, oxygen, and some other elements are made inside lower-mass stars during the red-giant stage. but where do the heavier elements we know and love (such as the silicon and iron inside earth, and the gold and silver in our jewelry) come from? the kinds of stars we have been discussing so far never get hot enough at their centers to make these elements.