fransson (stockholm university), m. matsuura (cardiff university), m. j. barlow (university college london), p. j. kavanagh (maynooth university), j. larsson (kth royal institute of technology)/esa, cc by 4.0) one of the elements formed in a supernova explosion is radioactive nickel, with an atomic mass of 56 (that is, the total number of protons plus neutrons in its nucleus is 56). nickel-56 is unstable and changes spontaneously (with a half-life of about 6 days) to cobalt-56. (recall that a half-life is the time it takes for half the nuclei in a sample to undergo radioactive decay.) cobalt-56 in turn decays with a half-life of about 77 days to iron-56, which is stable. energetic gamma rays are emitted when these radioactive nuclei decay. those gamma rays then serve as a new source of energy for the expanding layers of the supernova. the gamma rays are absorbed in the overlying gas and re-emitted at visible wavelengths, keeping the remains of the star bright.
as you can see in figure 23.13, astronomers did observe brightening due to radioactive nuclei in the first few months following the supernova’s outburst and then saw the extra light die away as more and more of the radioactive nuclei decayed to stable iron. the gamma-ray heating was responsible for virtually all of the radiation detected from sn 1987a after day 40. some gamma rays also escaped directly without being absorbed. these were detected by earth-orbiting telescopes at the wavelengths expected for the decay of radioactive nickel and cobalt, clearly confirming our understanding that new elements were indeed formed in the crucible of the supernova. neutrinos from sn 1987a if there had been any human observers in the large magellanic cloud about 160,000 years ago, the explosion we call sn 1987a would have been a brilliant spectacle in their skies. yet we know that less than 1/10 of 1% of 23.3 • supernova observations 795 [image: astronomy_openstax_page813_img1.jpeg] the energy of the explosion appeared as visible light.
about 1% of the energy was required to destroy the star, and the rest was carried away by neutrinos (as discussed in evolution of massive stars: an explosive finish). the overall energy in these neutrinos was truly astounding. in the initial second of the event, as we noted earlier in our general discussion of supernovae, their total luminosity exceeded the luminosity of all the stars in over a billion galaxies. and the supernova generated this energy in a volume less than 50 kilometers in diameter! supernovae are one of the most violent events in the universe, and their light turns out to be only the tip of the iceberg in revealing how much energy they produce. in 1987, the neutrinos from sn 1987a were detected by two instruments—which might be called “neutrino telescopes”—almost a full day before shelton’s observations.
(this is because the neutrinos get out of the exploding star more easily than light does, and also because you don’t need to wait until nightfall to catch a “glimpse” of them.) both neutrino telescopes, one in a deep mine in japan and the other under lake erie, consist of several thousand tons of purified water surrounded by several hundred light-sensitive detectors. incoming neutrinos interact with the water to produce positrons and electrons, which move rapidly through the water and emit deep blue light. altogether, 19 neutrinos were detected. since the neutrino telescopes were in the northern hemisphere and the supernova occurred in the southern hemisphere, the detected neutrinos had already passed through earth and were on their way back out into space when they were captured. only a few neutrinos were detected because the probability that they will interact with ordinary matter is very, very low. it is estimated that the supernova actually released 1058 neutrinos. a tiny fraction of these, about 30 billion, eventually passed through each square centimeter of earth’s surface. about a million people actually experienced a neutrino interaction within their bodies as a result of the supernova.