since we saw that low-mass stars are much more common than high-mass stars, this confirms our view of planetary nebulae as sort of “last gasp” of low-mass star evolution. 22.4 • further evolution of stars 763 [image: astronomy_openstax_page781_img1.jpeg] cosmic recycling the loss of mass by dying stars is a key step in the gigantic cosmic recycling scheme we discussed in between the stars: gas and dust in space. remember that stars form from vast clouds of gas and dust. as they end their lives, stars return part of their gas to the galactic reservoirs of raw material. eventually, some of the expelled material from aging stars will participate in the formation of new star systems. however, the atoms returned to the galaxy by an aging star are not necessarily the same ones it received initially. the star, after all, has fused hydrogen and helium to form new elements over the course of its life. and during the red-giant stage, material from the star’s central regions is dredged up and mixed with its outer layers, which can cause further nuclear reactions and the creation of still more new elements.
as a result, the winds that blow outward from such stars include atoms that were “newly minted” inside the stars’ cores. (as we will see, this mechanism is even more effective for high-mass stars, but it does work for stars with masses like that of the sun.) in this way, the raw material of the galaxy is not only resupplied but also receives infusions of new elements. you might say this cosmic recycling plan allows the universe to get more “interesting” all the time. the red giant sun and the fate of earth how will the evolution of the sun affect conditions on earth in the future? although the sun has appeared reasonably steady in size and luminosity over recorded human history, that brief span means nothing compared with the timescales we have been discussing. let’s examine the long-term prospects for our planet. the sun took its place on the zero-age main sequence approximately 4.5 billion years ago. at that time, it emitted only about 70% of the energy that it radiates today. one might expect that earth would have been a lot colder than it is now, with the oceans frozen solid.
but if this were the case, it would be hard to explain why simple life forms existed when earth was less than a billion years old. scientists now think that the explanation may be that much more carbon dioxide was present in earth’s atmosphere when it was young, and that a much stronger greenhouse effect kept earth warm. (in the greenhouse effect, gases like carbon dioxide or water vapor allow the sun’s light to come in but do not allow the infrared radiation from the ground to escape back into space, so the temperature near earth’s surface increases.) carbon dioxide in earth’s atmosphere has steadily declined as the sun has increased in luminosity. as the brighter sun increases the temperature of earth, rocks weather faster and react with carbon dioxide, removing it from the atmosphere. the warmer sun and the weaker greenhouse effect have kept earth at a nearly constant temperature for most of its life. this remarkable coincidence, which has resulted in fairly stable climatic conditions, has been the key in the development of complex life-forms on our planet. as a result of changes caused by the buildup of helium in its core, the sun will continue to increase in luminosity as it grows older, and more and more radiation will reach earth. for a while, the amount of carbon dioxide will continue to decrease.
(note that this effect counteracts increases in carbon dioxide from human activities, but on a much-too-slow timescale to undo the changes in climate that are likely to occur in the next 100 years.) eventually, the heating of earth will melt the polar caps and increase the evaporation of the oceans. water vapor is also an efficient greenhouse gas and will more than compensate for the decrease in carbon dioxide. sooner or later (atmospheric models are not yet good enough to say exactly when, but estimates range from 500 million to 2 billion years), the increased water vapor will cause a runaway greenhouse effect. making connections 764 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org about 1 billion years from now, earth will lose its water vapor. in the upper atmosphere, sunlight will break down water vapor into hydrogen, and the fast-moving hydrogen atoms will escape into outer space. like humpty dumpty, the water molecules cannot be put back together again. earth will start to resemble the venus of today, and temperatures will become much too high for life as we know it. all of this will happen before the sun even becomes a red giant. then the bad news really starts.