within these clumps, there are even denser, smaller regions called cores. the cores are the embryos of stars. the conditions in these cores—low temperature and high density—are just what is required to make stars. remember that the essence of the life story of any star is the ongoing competition between two forces: gravity and pressure. the force of gravity, pulling inward, tries to make a star collapse. internal pressure produced by the motions of the gas atoms, pushing outward, tries to force the star to expand. when a star is first forming, low temperature (and hence, low pressure) and high density (hence, greater gravitational attraction) both work to give gravity the advantage. in order to form a star—that is, a dense, hot ball of matter capable of starting nuclear reactions deep within—we need a typical core of interstellar atoms and molecules to shrink in radius and increase in density by a factor of nearly 1020. it is the force of gravity that produces this drastic collapse. the orion molecular cloud let’s discuss what happens in regions of star formation by considering a nearby site where stars are forming right now.
one of the best-studied stellar nurseries is in the constellation of orion, the hunter, about 1500 light-years away (figure 21.3). the pattern of the hunter is easy to recognize by the conspicuous “belt” of three stars that mark his waist. the orion molecular cloud is much larger than the star pattern and is truly an 21.1 • star formation 701 [image: astronomy_openstax_page719_img1.jpeg] impressive structure. in its long dimension, it stretches over a distance of about 100 light-years. the total quantity of molecular gas is about 200,000 times the mass of the sun. most of the cloud does not glow with visible light but betrays its presence by the radiation that the dusty gas gives off at infrared and radio wavelengths. figure 21.3 orion in visible and infrared. (a) the orion star group was named after the legendary hunter in greek mythology. three stars close together in a link mark orion’s belt. the ancients imagined a sword hanging from the belt; the object at the end of the blue line in this sword is the orion nebula.
(b) this wide-angle, infrared view of the same area was taken with the infrared astronomical satellite. heated dust clouds dominate in this false-color image, and many of the stars that stood out on part (a) are now invisible. an exception is the cool, red-giant star betelgeuse, which can be seen as a yellowish point at the left vertex of the blue triangle (at orion’s left armpit). the large, yellow ring to the right of betelgeuse is the remnant of an exploded star. the infrared image lets us see how large and full of cooler material the orion molecular cloud really is. on the visible-light image at left, you see only two colorful regions of interstellar matter—the two, bright yellow splotches at the left end of and below orion’s belt. the lower one is the orion nebula and the higher one is the region of the horsehead nebula.
(credit: modification of work by nasa, visible light: akira fujii; infrared: infrared astronomical satellite) the stars in orion’s belt are typically about 5 million years old, whereas the stars near the middle of the “sword” hanging from orion’s belt are only 300,000 to 1 million years old. the region about halfway down the sword where star formation is still taking place is called the orion nebula. about 2200 young stars are found in this region, which is only slightly larger than a dozen light-years in diameter. the orion nebula also contains a tight cluster of stars called the trapezium (figure 21.5). the brightest trapezium stars can be seen easily with a small telescope. 702 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page720_img1.jpeg] figure 21.4 orion nebula. (a) the orion nebula is shown in visible light. (b) with near-infrared radiation, we can see more detail within the dusty nebula since infrared can penetrate dust more easily than can visible light.