(we textbook authors can only apologize to our readers for the whole mess!) the variability of delta cephei was discovered in 1784 by the young english astronomer john goodricke (see john goodricke). the star rises rather rapidly to maximum light and then falls more slowly to minimum light, taking a total of 5.4 days for one cycle. the curve in figure 19.9 represents a simplified version of the light curve of delta cephei. 19.3 • variable stars: one key to cosmic distances 651 [image: astronomy_openstax_page669_img1.jpeg] several hundred cepheid variables are known in our galaxy. most cepheids have periods in the range of 3 to 50 days and luminosities that are about 1000 to 10,000 times greater than that of the sun. their variations in luminosity range from a few percent to a factor of 10. polaris, the north star, is a cepheid variable that, for a long time, varied by one tenth of a magnitude, or by about 10% in visual luminosity, in a period of just under 4 days.
recent measurements indicate that the amount by which the brightness of polaris changes is decreasing and that, sometime in the future, this star will no longer be a pulsating variable. this is just one more piece of evidence that stars really do evolve and change in fundamental ways as they age, and that being a cepheid variable represents a stage in the life of the star. the period-luminosity relation the importance of cepheid variables lies in the fact that their periods and average luminosities turn out to be directly related. the longer the period (the longer the star takes to vary), the greater the luminosity. this period-luminosity relation was a remarkable discovery, one for which astronomers still (pardon the expression) thank their lucky stars. the period of such a star is easy to measure: a good telescope and a good clock are all you need. once you have the period, the relationship (which can be put into precise mathematical terms) will give you the luminosity of the star. let’s be clear on what that means. the relation allows you to essentially “read off” how bright the star really is (how much energy it puts out). astronomers can then compare this intrinsic brightness with the apparent brightness of the star.
as we saw, the difference between the two allows them to calculate the distance. the relation between period and luminosity was discovered in 1908 by henrietta leavitt (figure 19.10), a staff member at the harvard college observatory (and one of a number of women working for low wages assisting edward pickering, the observatory’s director; see annie cannon: classifier of the stars). leavitt discovered hundreds of variable stars in the large magellanic cloud and small magellanic cloud, two great star systems that are actually neighboring galaxies (although they were not known to be galaxies then). a small fraction of these variables were cepheids (figure 19.11). figure 19.10 henrietta swan leavitt (1868–1921). leavitt worked as an astronomer at the harvard college observatory. while studying photographs of the magellanic clouds, she found over 1700 variable stars, including 20 cepheids. since all the cepheids in these systems were at roughly the same distance, she was able to compare their luminosities and periods of variation.
she thus discovered a fundamental relationship between these characteristics that led to a new and much better way of estimating cosmic distances. (credit: modification of work by aip) these systems presented a wonderful opportunity to study the behavior of variable stars independent of their distance. for all practical purposes, the magellanic clouds are so far away that astronomers can assume that all the stars in them are at roughly the same distance from us. (in the same way, all the suburbs of los angeles are roughly the same distance from new york city. of course, if you are in los angeles, you will notice annoying distances between the suburbs, but compared to how far away new york city is, the differences 652 19 • celestial distances access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page670_img1.jpeg] seem small.) if all the variable stars in the magellanic clouds are at roughly the same distance, then any difference in their apparent brightnesses must be caused by differences in their intrinsic luminosities. figure 19.11 large magellanic cloud.