first estimates suggest that the merger produced about 200 earth masses of gold, and around 500 earth masses of platinum. this makes clear that neutron star mergers are a significant source of heavy elements. more such mergers are being found (see figure 24.19) and they will improve estimates of the frequency at which neutron star mergers occur; it may well turn out that the vast majority of heavy elements have been created in such cataclysms. no electromagnetic observations have been detected from the mergers of two black holes. in june 2021, scientists from ligo and virgo announced the first detection of mergers between black holes and neutron stars, another of the really energetic events that we listed as possible sources for a detectable burst of gravitational waves. again, no electromagnetic waves from the two events were observed or expected, demonstrating the importance of using what we are now calling “multi-messenger astronomy” to understand 24.7 • gravitational wave astronomy 853 the universe fully. observing the merger of black holes via gravitational waves means that we can now test einstein’s general theory of relativity where its effects are very strong—close to black holes—and not weak, as they are near earth.
one remarkable result from these detections is that the observed signals so closely match the theoretical predictions made using einstein’s theory. once again, einstein’s revolutionary idea is found to be the correct description of nature. because of the scientific significance of the observations of gravitational waves, three of the ligo project leaders—rainer weiss of mit, and kip thorne and barry barish of caltech—were awarded the nobel prize in 2017. ground-based gravitational-wave detectors can detect mergers of black holes with masses up to about 100 times the mass of the sun. astronomers would now like to look for the merger of distant supermassive black holes (see supermassive black holes: what quasars really are) with masses of thousands to millions of times larger, which might have occurred when the first generation of stars formed, only a few hundred million years after the big bang. the gravitational waves emitted by mergers of supermassive black holes are so long that it is necessary to go to space to build an observatory large enough to detect them.
esa (the european space agency), with contributions from nasa, is planning to launch a facility named lisa (laser interferometer space antenna) in 2034 to search for mergers of black holes with masses thousands to millions of times larger than the mass of the sun. the experiment will consist of three spacecraft arranged in an equilateral triangle with sides 2.5 million km long, flying along an earth-like heliocentric orbit. a test mass floats free inside each spacecraft, effectively in free-fall, while the spacecraft around it absorbs the effects of light pressure, solar wind particles, and anything that might perturb its orbit. lasers will be used to measure very accurately the distances between the test masses. changes in distance will then signal the passing of gravitational waves. we should end by acknowledging that the ideas discussed in this chapter may seem strange and overwhelming, especially the first time you read them. the consequences of the general theory of relatively take some getting used to. but they do make the universe more bizarre—and interesting—than you probably thought before you took this course. figure 24.19 some black hole merger events observed with gravitational waves. the vertical axis shows the masses for some known black holes and neutron stars.
the light blue dots represent black hole mergers seen with ligo-virgo, with the individual black holes and the resulting merged black hole connected with an arrow. note that, as a result of these mergers, we are starting to observe some black holes with masses so large that new ideas may be required to explain them. the purple dots represent black holes seen with electro-magnetic radiation; these have significantly smaller masses. the orange dots represent neutron star mergers seen through the gravitational waves they emit. the yellow dots are neutron stars seen with electro-magnetic radiation.