orbital data for the planets planet semimajor axis (au) period (y) eccentricity mercury 0.39 0.24 0.21 venus 0.72 0.6 0.01 earth 1 1.00 0.02 mars 1.52 1.88 0.09 (ceres) 2.77 4.6 0.08 jupiter 5.20 11.86 0.05 table 3.2 86 3 • orbits and gravity access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page104_img1.jpeg] planet semimajor axis (au) period (y) eccentricity saturn 9.54 29.46 0.06 uranus 19.19 84.01 0.05 neptune 30.06 164.82 0.01 table 3.2 comets generally have orbits of larger size and greater eccentricity than those of the asteroids. typically, the eccentricity of their orbits is 0.8 or higher. according to kepler’s second law, therefore, they spend most of their time far from the sun, moving very slowly.
as they approach perihelion, the comets speed up and whip through the inner parts of their orbits more rapidly. 3.5 motions of satellites and spacecraft learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: newton’s universal law of gravitation and kepler’s laws describe the motions of earth satellites and interplanetary spacecraft as well as the planets. sputnik, the first artificial earth satellite, was launched by what was then called the soviet union on october 4, 1957. since that time, thousands of satellites have been placed into orbit around earth, and spacecraft have also orbited the moon, venus, mars, jupiter, saturn, and a number of asteroids and comets. once an artificial satellite is in orbit, its behavior is no different from that of a natural satellite, such as our moon. if the satellite is high enough to be free of atmospheric friction, it will remain in orbit forever. however, although there is no difficulty in maintaining a satellite once it is in orbit, a great deal of energy is required to lift the spacecraft off earth and accelerate it to orbital speed.
to illustrate how a satellite is launched, imagine a gun firing a bullet horizontally from the top of a high mountain, as in figure 3.11, which has been adapted from a similar diagram by newton. imagine, further, that the friction of the air could be removed and that nothing gets in the bullet’s way. then the only force that acts on the bullet after it leaves the muzzle is the gravitational force between the bullet and earth. explain how an object (such as a satellite) can be put into orbit around earth explain how an object (such as a planetary probe) can escape from orbit 3.5 • motions of satellites and spacecraft 87 figure 3.11 firing a bullet into orbit. (a) for paths a and b, the velocity is not enough to prevent gravity from pulling the bullet back to earth; in case c, the velocity allows the bullet to fall completely around earth. (b) this diagram by newton in his de mundi systemate, 1731 edition, illustrates the same concept shown in (a). if the bullet is fired with a velocity we can call va, the gravitational force acting upon it pulls it downward toward earth, where it strikes the ground at point a.
however, if it is given a higher muzzle velocity, vb, its higher speed carries it farther before it hits the ground at point b. if our bullet is given a high enough muzzle velocity, vc, the curved surface of earth causes the ground to remain the same distance from the bullet so that the bullet falls around earth in a complete circle. the speed needed to do this—called the circular satellite velocity—is about 8 kilometers per second, or about 17,500 miles per hour in more familiar units. use the newton’s mountain simulator (https://openstax.org/l/30newmtnsim) to see for yourself the effects of increasing an object’s speed. you can raise the speed until you find the speed that is just fast enough for an object to orbit the earth, the circular satellite velocity, and also the speed at which an object leaves the earth forever, or the escape speed. each year, more than 50 new satellites are launched into orbit by such nations as russia, the united states, china, japan, india, and israel, as well as by the european space agency (esa), a consortium of european nations (figure 3.12).