accretion of a satellite galaxy would stir up the orbits of the stars and gas clouds originally in the thin disk and cause them to move higher above and below the mid-plane of the galaxy. meanwhile, the galaxy’s stars would add to the fluffed-up mix. if such a collision happened about 10 billion years ago, then any gas in the two galaxies that had not yet formed into stars would have had plenty of time to settle back down into the thin disk. the gas could then have begun forming subsequent generations of population i stars. this timing is also consistent with the typical ages of stars in the thick disk. the milky way has more collisions in store. an example is the canis major dwarf galaxy, which has a mass of about 1% of the mass of the milky way. already long tidal tails have been stripped from this galaxy, which have wrapped themselves around the milky way three times. several of the globular clusters found in the milky way may also have come from the canis major dwarf, which is expected to merge gradually with the milky way over about the next billion years. in about 4 billion years, the milky way itself will be swallowed up, since it and the andromeda galaxy are on a collision course.
our computer models show that after a complex interaction, the two will merge to form a larger, more rounded galaxy (figure 25.25). 25.6 • the formation of the galaxy 889 [image: astronomy_openstax_page907_img1.jpeg] figure 25.25 collision of the milky way with andromeda. in about 3 billion years, the milky way galaxy and andromeda galaxy will begin a long process of colliding, separating, and then coming back together to form an elliptical galaxy. the whole interaction will take 3 to 4 billion years. these computer-simulated images show the following sequence: (1) in 3.75 billion years, andromeda has approached the milky way. (2) new star formation fills the sky 3.85 billion years from now. (3) star formation continues at 3.9 billion years. (4) the galaxy shapes change as they interact, with andromeda being stretched and our galaxy becoming warped, about 4 billion years from now. (5) in 5.1 billion years, the cores of the two galaxies are bright lobes.
(6) in 7 billion years, the merged galaxies form a huge elliptical galaxy whose brightness fills the night sky. this artist’s illustrations show events from a vantage point 25,000 light-years from the center of the milky way. however, we should mention that the sun may not be at that distance throughout the sequence of events, as the collision readjusts the orbits of many stars within each galaxy. (credit: nasa; esa; z. levay, r. van der marel, stscl; t. hallas, and a. mellinger) we are thus coming to realize that “environmental influences” (and not just a galaxy’s original characteristics) play an important role in determining the properties and development of our galaxy. in future chapters we will see that collisions and mergers are a major factor in the evolution of many other galaxies as well.