population i stars formed after previous generations of stars had produced heavy elements and ejected them into the interstellar medium. the bulge stars, most of which are more than 10 billion years old, have unusually high amounts of heavy elements, presumably because there were many massive first-generation stars in this dense region, and these quickly seeded the next generations of stars with heavier elements. 25.6 the formation of the galaxy the galaxy began forming a little more than 13 billion years ago. models suggest that the stars in the halo and globular clusters formed first, while the galaxy was spherical. the gas, somewhat enriched in heavy elements by the first generation of stars, then collapsed from a spherical distribution to a rotating disk-shaped distribution. stars are still forming today from the gas and dust that remain in the disk. star formation occurs most rapidly in the spiral arms, where the density of interstellar matter is highest. the galaxy captured (and still is capturing) additional stars and globular clusters from small galaxies that ventured too close to the milky way. in 3 to 4 billion years, the galaxy will begin to collide with the andromeda galaxy, and after about 7 billion years, the two galaxies will merge to form a giant elliptical galaxy.
for further exploration articles carlisle, c. “double bubble toil.” sky & telescope (february 2021): 60. about the fermi bubbles at the center of the galaxy. carlisle, c. “near the pit: stars at the galactic center.” sky & telescope (september 2018): 22. on the stars that orbit the black hole in the center and how they got there. croswell, k. “dawn of the milky way.” in sky & telescope (august 2023): 34. on our evolving understanding of how the milky way formed and developed. croswell, k. “mapping the milky way.” sky & telescope (november 2019): 16. how astronomers are pinning down the spiral structure of our galaxy. croswell, k. “the cepheus spur.” sky & telescope (february 2023): 30. on a structural feature that connects our local arm with the perseus arm of the galaxy. gallagher, j., wyse, r., & benjamin, r. “the new milky way.” astronomy (september 2011): 26.
highlights all aspects of the milky way based on recent observations. goldstein, a. “finding our place in the milky way.” astronomy (august 2015): 50. on the history of observations that pinpointed the sun’s location in the galaxy. haggard, d., & bower, g. “in the heart of the milky way.” sky & telescope (february 2016): 16. on observations of the galaxy’s nucleus and the supermassive black hole and magnetar there. hall, s. “an unusual home.” sky & telescope (april 2022): 34. on new research on how our galaxy interacted 892 25 • for further exploration access for free at openstax.org with satellite galaxies in the past and whether it is typical. hall, s. “torrents of the milky way.” sky & telescope (march 2020): 34. how the gaia satellite is showing us the history of star streams and past mergers within our galaxy. kruesi, l. “how we mapped the milky way.” astronomy (october 2009): 28. schilling, g.
“the gaia revolution.” sky & telescope (february 2023): 34. on the work of the european satellite mapping the galaxy and the sky with unprecedented accuracy in three dimensions. shubinski, r. “the shape of the milky way.” astronomy (february 2022): 56. how our galaxy’s shape was determined. szpir, m. “passing the bar exam.” astronomy (march 1999): 46. on evidence that our galaxy is a barred spiral. waller, w. “redesigning the milky way.” sky & telescope (september 2004): 50. on recent multi-wavelength surveys of the galaxy. websites 2020 nobel prize in physics: popular science background: https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2020/10/ popular-physicsprize2020-1.pdf (https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2020/10/popular- physicsprize2020-1.pdf). read about the justification for giving andrea ghez and reinhard genzel the nobel prize for establishing the existence and mass of the super-massive black hole at the center of the milky way.