a good example is the date when the imperial japanese navy bombed pearl harbor in hawaii, known in the united states as sunday, december 7, 1941, but taught to japanese students as monday, december 8. figure 4.11 where the date changes. the international date line is an arbitrarily drawn line on earth where the date changes. so that neighbors do not have different days, the line is located where earth’s surface is mostly water. 4.4 the calendar learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: “what’s today’s date?” is one of the most common questions you can ask (usually when signing a document or worrying about whether you should have started studying for your next astronomy exam). long before the era of digital watches, smartphones, and fitness bands that tell the date, people used calendars to help measure the passage of time. the challenge of the calendar there are two traditional functions of any calendar. first, it must keep track of time over the course of long spans, allowing people to anticipate the cycle of the seasons and to honor special religious or personal anniversaries.
second, to be useful to a large number of people, a calendar must use natural time intervals that everyone can agree on—those defined by the motions of earth, the moon, and sometimes even the planets. the natural units of our calendar are the day, based on the period of rotation of earth; the month, understand how calendars varied among different cultures explain the origins of our modern calendar 114 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page132_img1.jpeg] based on the cycle of the moon’s phases (see later in this chapter) about earth; and the year, based on the period of revolution of earth about the sun. difficulties have resulted from the fact that these three periods are not commensurable; that’s a fancy way of saying that one does not divide evenly into any of the others. the rotation period of earth is, by definition, 1.0000 day (and here the solar day is used, since that is the basis of human experience). the period required by the moon to complete its cycle of phases, called the month, is 29.5306 days.
the basic period of revolution of earth, called the tropical year, is 365.2422 days. the ratios of these numbers are not convenient for calculations. this is the historic challenge of the calendar, dealt with in various ways by different cultures. early calendars even the earliest cultures were concerned with the keeping of time and the calendar. some interesting examples include monuments left by bronze age people in northwestern europe, especially the british isles. the best preserved of the monuments is stonehenge, about 13 kilometers from salisbury in southwest england (figure 4.12). it is a complex array of stones, ditches, and holes arranged in concentric circles. carbon dating and other studies show that stonehenge was built during three periods ranging from about 2800 to 1500 bce. some of the stones are aligned with the directions of the sun and moon during their risings and settings at critical times of the year (such as the summer and winter solstices), and it is generally believed that at least one function of the monument was connected with the keeping of a calendar. figure 4.12 stonehenge. the ancient monument known as stonehenge was used to keep track of the motions of the sun and moon.
(credit: modification of work by adriano aurelio araujo) the maya in central america, who thrived more than a thousand years ago, were also concerned with the keeping of time. their calendar was as sophisticated as, and perhaps more complex than, contemporary calendars in europe. the maya did not attempt to correlate their calendar accurately with the length of the year or lunar month. rather, their calendar was a system for keeping track of the passage of days and for counting time far into the past or future. among other purposes, it was useful for predicting astronomical events, such as the position of venus in the sky (figure 4.13). 4.4 • the calendar 115 [image: astronomy_openstax_page133_img1.jpeg] figure 4.13 el caracol. this mayan observatory at chichen itza in the yucatan, mexico, dates from around the year 1000. (credit: “wiredtourist.com”/flickr) the ancient chinese developed an especially complex calendar, largely limited to a few privileged hereditary court astronomer-astrologers.