calculating the wavelength (λ) of a photon emitted from a state change of an electron in a hydrogen atom (the rydberg formula): 𝝀= 𝟏 𝑹∗( 𝟏 𝒏𝟐𝟐– 𝟏 𝒏𝟏𝟐) r is the rydberg constant: 1.097373156852873 * 107 in meters ^ -1 n2 is the lower or final state of the electron n1 is the higher or original state of the electron telescopes and binoculars 21. calculating the focal ratio of a telescope: 𝑭= 𝑭𝑳𝑻 𝑫 f is the focal ratio for the telescope flt is the focal length of the telescope d is the diameter of the telescope 22. calculating the magnification of a telescope: 𝑴= 𝑭𝑳𝑻 𝑭𝑳𝑬 flt is the focal length of the telescope fle is the focal length of the eyepiece m is the resulting magnification 23. calculating a reflecting telescope’s angular resolution: 𝑹 = 𝟎.
𝟐𝟓∗𝝀 𝑫 r is the angular resolution in arc-seconds λ is the wavelength of the light in micrometers d is the diameter of the primary mirror in meters 24. calculating a telescope’s maximum useful magnification: 𝑴𝒎𝒂𝒙= 𝑫∗𝟐 mmax is the maximum useful magnification d is the diameter of the telescope in millimeters 25. calculating a telescope’s minimum useful magnification: 𝑴𝒎𝒊𝒏= 𝑫/𝑫𝒆𝒚𝒆 mmin is the minimum useful magnification d is the diameter of the telescope in millimeters astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 385 deye is the diameter of the eye’s pupil at night in millimeters (usually 5 mm) 26.
calculating a telescope’s exit pupil: 𝑬𝑷= 𝑭𝑳𝒆 𝑭= 𝑭𝑳𝒆 𝑭𝑳𝒕 ∗𝑫 ep is the exit pupil fle is the focal length of the eyepiece f is the focal ratio flt is the focal length of the telescope d is the diameter of the telescope in millimeters 27. calculating a telescope’s actual field of view: 𝑭𝑶𝑽 𝒂= 𝑭𝑶𝑽 𝒂𝒑/ 𝑴 fova is the actual field of view – what you see in the telescope fovap is the apparent field of view – provided by the telescope manufacturer m is the magnification planets 28. calculating a planet’s density: 𝑫= 𝑴 𝑽= 𝑴 𝟒 𝟑∗𝟑.
𝟏𝟒𝟏𝟓𝟗∗𝒓𝟑 d is the density of the planet m is the mass of the planet v is the volume of the planet r is the radius of the planet radioactivity 29. calculating the amount of a radioactive material remaining based on elapsed time: 𝑭𝑹= (𝟏 𝟐) 𝒕 𝑻 fr is the fraction of the material remaining t is the elapsed time t is the half-life of the specific material you are measuring roche limits for planets 30. calculating the roche limit for a planet: 𝑹𝑳= 𝟐. 𝟒∗𝑹 r is the radius of the planet astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 386 converting mass and energy 31. converting mass into energy: 𝑬= 𝑴∗𝑪𝟐 e is energy in joules m is mass in kilograms c is the speed of light in kilometers per second 32. converting energy into mass: 𝑴= 𝑬 𝑪𝟐 stellar magnitudes 33.