hydrogen is ionized only by radiation with wavelengths shorter than 91.2 nm. what is the temperature of a star that emits its maximum energy at 91.2 nm? (use wien’s law from radiation and spectra.) based on this result, what are the spectral types of those stars likely to provide enough energy to produce h ii regions? 37. in the text, we said that the five-times ionized oxygen (ovi) seen in hot gas must have been produced by supernova shocks that heated the gas to millions of degrees, and not by starlight, the way h ii is produced. producing ovi by light requires wavelengths shorter than 10.9 nm. the hottest observed stars have surface temperatures of about 50,000 k. could they produce ovi? 38. dust was originally discovered because the stars in certain clusters seemed to be fainter than expected. suppose a star is behind a cloud of dust that dims its brightness by a factor of 100. suppose you do not realize the dust is there. how much in error will your distance estimate be? can you think of any measurement you might make to detect the dust? 39.
how would the density inside a cold cloud compare with the density of the ultra-hot interstellar gas if they were in pressure equilibrium? (it takes a large cloud to be able to shield its interior from heating so that it can be at such a low temperature.) (hint: in pressure equilibrium, the two regions must have nt equal, where n is the number of particles per unit volume and t is the temperature.) which region do you think is more suitable for the creation of new stars? why? 40. the text says that the local fluff, which surrounds the sun, has a temperature of 7500 k and a density 0.1 atom per cm3. the local fluff is embedded in hot gas with a temperature of 106 k and a density of about 0.01 atom per cm3. are they in equilibrium? (hint: in pressure equilibrium, the two regions must have nt equal, where n is the number of particles per unit volume and t is the temperature.) what is likely to happen to the local fluff? 698 20 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 21.1 where stars are born.
we see a close-up of part of the carina nebula taken with the hubble space telescope. this image reveals jets powered by newly forming stars embedded in a great cloud of gas and dust. parts of the clouds are glowing from the energy of very young stars recently formed within them. (credit: modification of work by nasa, esa, and m. livio and the hubble 20th anniversary team (stsci)) chapter outline 21.1 star formation 21.2 the h–r diagram and the study of stellar evolution 21.3 evidence that planets form around other stars 21.4 planets beyond the solar system: search and discovery 21.5 exoplanets everywhere: what we are learning 21.6 new perspectives on planet formation thinking ahead there are countless suns and countless earths all rotating round their suns in exactly the same way as the planets of our system. we see only the suns because they are the largest bodies and are luminous, but their planets remain invisible to us because they are smaller and non-luminous. . . . the unnumbered worlds in the universe are all similar in form and rank and subject to the same forces and the same laws.
>—giordano bruno in on the infinite universe and worlds (1584) bruno was tried for heresy by the roman inquisition and burned at the stake in 1600. we’ve discussed stars as nuclear furnaces that convert light elements into heavier ones. a star’s nuclear evolution begins when hydrogen is fused into helium, but that can only occur when the core temperature exceeds 10 to 12 million k. since stars form from cold interstellar material, we must understand how they collapse and eventually reach this “ignition temperature” to explain the birth of stars. star formation is a continuous process, from the birth of our galaxy right up to today. we estimate that every year in our galaxy, on average, three solar masses of interstellar matter are converted into stars. this may sound like a small amount of mass for an object as large as a galaxy, but only three new stars (out of billions in the galaxy) are formed each year. the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system 21 [image: astronomy_openstax_page717_img1.jpeg] do planets orbit other stars or is ours the only planetary system?