deuterium fusion can occur when the core temperature reaches 1 * 106 k fusion of iron into nickel requires a core temperature of zinc using the alpha process may occur, but the high temperatures in the star’s core produce photons with such high energies that lareger atoms are destroyed quickly through photodisintegration astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 282 figure 323: slow neutron capture process the s-process occurs in the core at the same time as the alpha process component 118 – fusion in the s-process in addition to fusion occuring in the core through the alpha process creating elements up to iron, there is another process occuring as the star is reaching the end of its life. the s-process, or the slow neutron capture process (slow process), will create elements up to bismuth. free neutrons in the core of stars are available to combine with nuclei to generate heavier isotopes of the existing atoms. when an unstable isotope of an atom is reached, and when there is insufficient time for another neutron to combine with the nucleus before it decays, the nucleus will become the isotope of the previous element with roughly the same mass. on average, the s-process operates at an average neutron capture rate of one per year.
when the nucleus decays the neutron capture process can continue. for example, at the upper limit for this process, bismuth is created. there are no stable isotopes of bismuth, but 209bismuth has a halflife of 1.9*1019 years which is almost stable. the s-process will have the reactions on 209bismuth shown in figure 323. the s-process creates a path through the elements and with isoptopes that is a zig-zag. neutrons are added until an unstable isotope decays. this usually results in an electron being emitted by the nucleus and the atom being changed to one with the next lower atomic number. neutrons are again added to the nucleus until the result is an unstable isotope. then the cycle repeats. the s-process occurs in the core of stars as the heavier elements are being formed by the alpha process.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page282_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page282_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 283 s-process = 1 neutron per year r-process = 1 neutron per second s-process makes atoms to bismuth r-process makes atoms to uranium equation 18: neutron creation 13c + 4he → 16o + n 22ne + 4he → 25mg + n component 119 – fusion in the r-process at the end of a large star’s life, as the supernova is occuring, there is another fusion process that occurs. it is called the r-process, or the rapid process of neutron capture (rapid process). the process is very similar to the s-process. neutrons are captured by the nucleus until it becomes unstable and decays. the difference is that the r-process requires less time for each successive neutron capture. rather than a rate of one neutron capture per year (as in the s- process), the r-process proceeds at an average rate of one neutron capture per second. this means that more isotopes are stable enough to permit the process to continue to higher-mass nuclei before decay occurs.
the upper limit to this process is uranium. although there are isotopes of elements more massive than uranium that are stable enough for the r-process to function, there is another roadblock that occurs. as a nucleus grows, there is greater stress on the strong force to hold the protons together in the nucleus. additional neutrons in the nucleus help strengthen the strong force, but at the size of uranium the strong force is no longer able to cope with the electromagnetic force. the protons are then unable to stick to the nucleus and higher mass atoms are not possible. source of the neutrons to create elements by the slow and rapid neutron capture processes there must be an adequate supply of neutrons. the most common processes to create neutrons are shown in equation 18. these two processes can begin once a sufficient supply of 13carbon or 25magnesium is available to supply the raw materials for the nuclear reaction. these are not the forms of these elements that are created in the triple-alpha and alpha processes, but are the results of other nuclear reactions occurring in the core of large stars.