the moon, the smallest of the terrestrial worlds, was internally active until about 3.3 billion years ago, when its major volcanism ceased. since that time, its mantle has cooled and become solid, and today even internal seismic activity has declined to almost zero. the moon is a geologically dead world. although we know much less about mercury, it seems likely that this planet, too, ceased most volcanic activity about the same time the moon did. mars represents an intermediate case, and it has been much more active than the moon. the southern hemisphere crust had formed by 4 billion years ago, and the northern hemisphere volcanic plains seem to be contemporary with the lunar maria. however, the tharsis bulge formed somewhat later, and activity in the large tharsis volcanoes has apparently continued on and off to the present era. earth and venus are the largest and most active terrestrial planets. our planet experiences global plate tectonics driven by convection in its mantle. as a result, our surface is continually reworked, and most of earth’s surface material is less than 200 million years old. venus has generally similar levels of volcanic activity, but unlike earth, it has not experienced plate tectonics.
most of its surface appears to be no more than 500 million years old. we did see that the surface of our sister planet is being modified by a kind of “blob tectonics”—where hot material from below puckers and bursts through the surface, leading to coronae, 14.5 • planetary evolution 497 [image: astronomy_openstax_page515_img1.jpeg] pancake volcanoes, and other such features. a better understanding of the geological differences between venus and earth is a high priority for planetary geologists. the geological evolution of the icy moons and pluto has been somewhat different from that of the terrestrial planets. tidal energy sources have been active, and the materials nature has to work with are not the same. on these outer worlds, we see evidence of low-temperature volcanism, with the silicate lava of the inner planets being supplemented by sulfur compounds on io, and replaced by water and other ices on pluto and other outer-planet moons. elevation differences let’s look at some specific examples of how planets differ. the mountains on the terrestrial planets owe their origins to different processes.
on the moon and mercury, the major mountains are ejecta thrown up by the large basin-forming impacts that took place billions of years ago. most large mountains on mars are volcanoes, produced by repeated eruptions of lava from the same vents. there are similar (but smaller) volcanoes on earth and venus. however, the highest mountains on earth and venus are the result of compression and uplift of the surface. on earth, this crustal compression results from collisions of one continental plate with another. it is interesting to compare the maximum heights of the volcanoes on earth, venus, and mars (figure 14.19). on venus and earth, the maximum elevation differences between these mountains and their surroundings are about 10 kilometers. olympus mons, in contrast, towers more than 20 kilometers above its surroundings and nearly 30 kilometers above the lowest elevation areas on mars. figure 14.19 highest mountains on mars, venus, and earth. mountains can rise taller on mars because mars has less surface gravity and no moving plates. the vertical scale is exaggerated by a factor of three to make comparison easier. the label “sea level” refers only to earth, of course, since the other two planets don’t have oceans.
mauna loa and mt. everest are on earth, olympus mons is on mars, and the maxwell mountains are on venus. one reason olympus mons (figure 14.20) is so much higher than its terrestrial counterparts is that the crustal plates on earth never stop moving long enough to let a really large volcano grow. instead, the moving plate creates a long row of volcanoes like the hawaiian islands. on mars (and perhaps venus) the crust remains stationary with respect to the underlying hot spot, and so a single volcano can continue to grow for hundreds of millions of years. 498 14 • cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page516_img1.jpeg] figure 14.20 olympus mons. the largest martian volcano is seen from above in this spectacular composite image created from many viking orbiter photographs. the volcano is nearly 500 kilometers wide at its base and more than 20 kilometers high.