very reasonably, the ancients thought this meant the sun was slowly moving around earth, taking a period of time we call 1 year to make a full circle. today, of course, we know it is earth that is going around the sun, but the effect is the same: the sun’s position in our sky changes day to day. we have a similar experience when we walk around a campfire at night; we see the flames appear in front of each person seated about the fire in turn. the path the sun appears to take around the celestial sphere each year is called the ecliptic (figure 2.6). because of its motion on the ecliptic, the sun rises about 4 minutes later each day with respect to the stars. earth must make just a bit more than one complete rotation (with respect to the stars) to bring the sun up again. astronomy basics 2.1 • the sky above 37 figure 2.5 star circles at different latitudes. the turning of the sky looks different depending on your latitude on earth. the red circle in each case is your horizon. your zenith is the point above your head. (a) at the north pole, the stars circle the zenith and do not rise and set.
(b) at the equator, the celestial poles are on the horizon, and the stars rise straight up and set straight down. (c) at intermediate latitudes, the north celestial pole is at some position between overhead and the horizon. its angle above the horizon turns out to be equal to the observer’s latitude. stars rise and set at an angle to the horizon. as the months go by and we look at the sun from different places in our orbit, we see it projected against different places in our orbit, and thus against different stars in the background (figure 2.6 and table 2.1)—or we would, at least, if we could see the stars in the daytime. in practice, we must deduce which stars lie behind and beyond the sun by observing the stars visible in the opposite direction at night. after a year, when earth has completed one trip around the sun, the sun will appear to have completed one circuit of the sky along the ecliptic. figure 2.6 constellations on the ecliptic.
as earth revolves around the sun, we sit on “platform earth” and see the sun moving 38 2 • observing the sky: the birth of astronomy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page56_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page56_img2.jpeg] around the sky. the circle in the sky that the sun appears to make around us in the course of a year is called the ecliptic. this circle (like all circles in the sky) goes through a set of constellations. the ancients thought these constellations, which the sun (and the moon and planets) visited, must be special and incorporated them into their system of astrology. note that at any given time of the year, some of the constellations crossed by the ecliptic are visible in the night sky; others are in the day sky and are thus hidden by the brilliance of the sun.
(the term constellation will be defined more precisely in the next subsection.) constellations on the ecliptic constellation on the ecliptic dates when the sun crosses it capricornus january 21–february 16 aquarius february 16–march 11 pisces march 11–april 18 aries april 18–may 13 taurus may 13–june 22 gemini june 22–july 21 cancer july 21–august 10 leo august 10–september 16 virgo september 16–october 31 libra october 31–november 23 scorpius november 23–november 29 ophiuchus november 29–december 18 sagittarius december 18–january 21 table 2.1 the ecliptic does not lie along the celestial equator but is inclined to it at an angle of about 23.5°. in other words, the sun’s annual path in the sky is not linked with earth’s equator.