if space is stretching during all the time the light is traveling, the light waves will be stretched as well. a redshift is a stretching of waves—the wavelength of each wave increases (figure 29.7). light from more distant galaxies travels for more time than light from closer ones. this means that the light has stretched more than light from closer ones and thus shows a greater redshift. figure 29.7 expansion and redshift. as an elastic surface expands, a wave on its surface stretches. for light waves, the increase in wavelength would be seen as a redshift. thus, what the measured redshift of light from an object is telling us is how much the universe has expanded since the light left the object. if the universe has expanded by a factor of 2, then the wavelength of the light (and all electromagnetic waves from the same source) will have doubled. models of the expansion before astronomers knew about dark energy or had a good measurement of how much matter exists in the universe, they made speculative models about how the universe might evolve over time. the four possible scenarios are shown in figure 29.8. in this diagram, time moves forward from the bottom upward, and the scale of space increases by the horizontal circles becoming wider.
1014 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1032_img1.jpeg] figure 29.8 four possible models of the universe. the yellow square marks the present in all four cases, and for all four, the hubble constant is equal to the same value at the present time. time is measured in the vertical direction. the first two universes on the left are ones in which the rate of expansion slows over time. the one on the left will eventually slow, come to a stop and reverse, ending up in a “big crunch,” while the one next to it will continue to expand forever, but ever-more slowly as time passes. the “coasting” universe is one that expands at a constant rate throughout all of cosmic time. the accelerating universe on the right will continue to expand faster and faster forever. (credit: modification of work by nasa/esa) the simplest scenario of an expanding universe would be one in which r increases with time at a constant rate. but you already know that life is not so simple.
the universe contains a great deal of mass and its gravity decelerates the expansion—by a large amount if the universe contains a lot of matter, or by a negligible amount if the universe is nearly empty. then there is the observed acceleration, which astronomers blame on a kind of dark energy. let’s first explore the range of possibilities with models for different amounts of mass in the universe and for different contributions by dark energy. in some models—as we shall see—the universe expands forever. in others, it stops expanding and starts to contract. after looking at the extreme possibilities, we will look at recent observations that allow us to choose the most likely scenario. we should perhaps pause for a minute to note how remarkable it is that we can do this at all. our understanding of the principles that underlie how the universe works on the large scale and our observations of how the objects in the universe change with time allow us to model the evolution of the entire cosmos these days. it is one of the loftiest achievements of the human mind. what astronomers look at in practice, to determine the kind of universe we live in, is the average density of the universe.
this is the mass of matter (including the equivalent mass of energy)1 that would be contained in each unit of volume (say, 1 cubic centimeter) if all the stars, galaxies, and other objects were taken apart, atom by atom, and if all those particles, along with the light and other energy, were distributed throughout all of space with absolute uniformity. if the average density is low, there is less mass and less gravity, and the universe will not decelerate very much. it can therefore expand forever. higher average density, on the other hand, means there is more mass and more gravity and that the stretching of space might slow down enough that the expansion will eventually stop. an extremely high density might even cause the universe to collapse again. for a given rate of expansion, there is a critical density—the mass per unit volume that will be just enough to slow the expansion to zero at some time infinitely far in the future. if the actual density is higher than this critical density, then the expansion will ultimately reverse and the universe will begin to contract. if the actual density is lower, then the universe will expand forever. these various possibilities are illustrated in figure 29.9.