sunspots the first evidence that the sun changes came from studies of sunspots, which are large, dark features seen on the surface of the sun caused by increased magnetic activity. they look darker because the spots are typically at a temperature of about 3800 k, whereas the bright regions that surround them are at about 5800 k (figure 15.13). occasionally, these spots are large enough to be visible to the unaided eye, and we have records going back over a thousand years from observers who noticed them when haze or mist reduced the sun’s intensity. (we emphasize what your parents have surely told you: looking at the sun for even a brief time can cause link to learning describe the sunspot cycle and, more generally, the solar cycle explain how magnetism is the source of solar activity 520 15 • the sun: a garden-variety star access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page538_img1.jpeg] permanent eye damage. this is the one area of astronomy where we don’t encourage you to do your own observing without getting careful instructions or filters from your instructor.) figure 15.13 sunspots.
a) image of sunspots, cooler and thus darker regions on the sun, taken in july 2012. you can see the dark, central region of each sunspot (called the umbra) surrounded by a less dark region (the penumbra). the largest spot shown here is about 11 earths wide. b) the new daniel inouye solar telescope took the most detailed image of a sunspot ever recorded in january 2020. a map of the united states is shown to scale. although sunspots appear dark when seen next to the hotter gases of the photosphere, an average sunspot, cut out of the solar surface and left standing in the night sky, would be about as bright as the full moon. the mottled appearance of the sun’s surface is granulation. (credit a: modification of work by nasa goddard space flight center, alan friedman; credit b: modification of work by nso/aura/nsf) while we understand that sunspots look darker because they are cooler, they are nevertheless hotter than the surfaces of many stars. if they could be removed from the sun, they would shine brightly. they appear dark only in contrast with the hotter, brighter photosphere around them.
individual sunspots come and go, with lifetimes that range from a few hours to a few months. if a spot lasts and develops, it usually consists of two parts: an inner darker core, the umbra, and a surrounding less dark region, the penumbra. many spots become much larger than earth, and a few, like the largest one shown in figure 15.13, have reached diameters over 140,000 kilometers. frequently, spots occur in groups of 2 to 20 or more. the largest groups are very complex and may have over 100 spots. like storms on earth, sunspots are not fixed in position, but they drift slowly compared with the sun’s rotation. by recording the apparent motions of the sunspots as the turning sun carried them across its disk (figure 15.14), galileo, in 1612, demonstrated that the sun rotates on its axis with a rotation period of approximately 1 month. our star turns in a west-to-east direction, like the orbital motions of the planets. the sun, however, is a gas and does not have to rotate rigidly, the way a solid body like earth does.
modern observations show that the speed of rotation of the sun varies according to latitude, that is, it’s different as you go north or south of the sun’s equator. the rotation period is about 25 days at the equator, 28 days at latitude 40°, and 36 days at latitude 80°. we call this behavior differential rotation. 15.2 • the solar cycle 521 [image: astronomy_openstax_page539_img1.jpeg] figure 15.14 sunspots rotate across sun’s surface. this sequence of photographs of the sun’s surface tracks the movement of sunspots across the visible hemisphere of the sun. on march 30, 2001, this group of sunspots extended across an area about 13 times the diameter of earth. this region produced many flares and coronal mass ejections. (credit: modification of work by soho/ nasa/esa) the sunspot cycle between 1826 and 1850, heinrich schwabe, a german pharmacist and amateur astronomer, kept daily records of the number of sunspots.