[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page363_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 364 figure 441: overall structure in the universe model by andrey kravtsov and anatoly klypin the universe with its stuctures of filaments and voids evolved over time. figure 441 shows how this structure would have evolved over time until we reach the present. the initial stars would have formed from the atoms in the primordial dust and gas cloud. as time progressed these stars formed galaxies, and these galaxies became part of the larger structure. the numbers associated with the “z” values are the redshift that corresponds to the stage of evolution. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page364_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 365 component 183 – what is life? this sounds like a deep philosophical question, but for astronomers that are interested in finding life beyond the earth, it is an important question. if you can’t define life, then you really can’t define your seaerch. there is no clear definition of what constitutes life. is something alive?
there seems to be some general agreement that something is alive if it: • reacts to stimulus in its environment – if the environment changes, the organism will react to this change in some way. • it moves – this could be movement in the sense that animals move, or it could be changing its orientation to take advantage of light or water as plants do. • consumes nutrients – materials are absorbed and converted into energy or materials to promote growth and reproduction. • it grows – this could be growth in size or growth by producing additional cells. • is able to reproduce – those things that are alive must be able to create additional examples of themselves. • evolves – mutations occur over time and those changes are incorporated to make the organism more successful. how does life start? if you start with the elements created in stars, and you now have living organisms, the question is how did you get there. scientists do not have all the answers but they do have many pieces of the puzzle. elements can be combined into molecules, some rather complex. when carbon is included in the mix, organic molecules can be created.
life depends on very complex molecules, but even the very complex molecules (such as proteins and dna, deoxyribonucleic acid) are composed of building blocks and based on carbon. dna is composed of nucleotide bases. proteins are composed of amino acids. are there ways to take common molecules that would have existed on the earth and combine them to form these building blocks? in 1952, stanley miller and harold urey designed the miller urey experiment to determine if amino acids could be formed in the laboratory. the experimental apparatus consisted of chemicals and conditions that were present in the early earth’s environment: chemicals, water, and energy. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 366 figure 442: the miller-urey experiment diagram by yassinemrabet water is heated until it boils. the water vapor moves to a chamber where there is a mixture of methane, ammonia, and hydrogen (components of an early atmosphere on earth). energy is applied to this mixture in the form of an electrical spark, not unlike lightening. the gases are cooled and are collected in a trap. when the material in the trap was analyzed, it was found that some amino acids had formed.
initially, these starter ingredients would combine to form new molecules: hydrogen cyanide, formaldehyde, acetyline, cyanoacetyline, and more. these molecules would then combine to form more complex molecules such as: amino acids and sugars. this simple experiment, designed to mimic conditions on the early earth, was able to produce building blocks needed to create life. are viruses alive? but are there any links between complex organic molecules that are not alive and organisms that are alive? the answer is: “yes!” viruses are an example that would fill the missing link. viruses do not always satisfy the conditions of being alive. if isolated in the laboratory, they do not seem alive. but when they are brought into contact with living organisms, they join with the cells of those organisms, and begin to behave as if they are alive. by themselves, the viruses do not have all of the tools to reproduce; but in a living cell, they are able to hijack the tools in the cell to make more viruses.