1 the milky way’s black hole the size of the event horizon of a black hole depends on the mass of the black hole. the greater the mass, the larger the radius of the event horizon. general relativity calculations show that the formula for the schwarzschild radius (rs) of the event horizon is where c is the speed of light, g is the gravitational constant, and m is the mass of the black hole. note that in this formula, 2, g, and c are all constant; only the mass changes from black hole to black hole. as we will see in the chapter on the milky way galaxy, astronomers have traced the paths of several stars near the center of our galaxy and found that they seem to be orbiting an unseen object—dubbed sgr a* (pronounced “sagittarius a-star”)—with a mass of about 4 million solar masses. what is the size of its schwarzschild radius? solution we can substitute data for g, m, and c (from appendix e) directly into the equation: this distance is about one-fifth of the radius of mercury’s orbit around the sun, yet the object contains 4 million solar masses and cannot be seen with our largest telescopes.
you can see why astronomers are convinced this object is a black hole. check your learning what would be the size of a black hole that contained only as much mass as a typical pickup truck (about 3000 kg)? (note that something with so little mass could never actually form a black hole, but it’s interesting to think about the result.) answer: substituting the data into our equation gives for comparison, the size of a proton is usually considered to be about 8 × 10−16 m, which would be about ten million times larger. a black hole myth much of the modern folklore about black holes is misleading. one idea you may have heard is that black holes go about sucking things up with their gravity. actually, it is only very close to a black hole that the strange effects we have been discussing come into play. the gravitational attraction far away from a black hole is the same as that of the star that collapsed to form it. remember that the gravity of any star some distance away acts as if all its mass were concentrated at a point in the center, which we call the center of gravity.
for real stars, we merely imagine that all mass is concentrated 24.5 • black holes 843 there; for black holes, all the mass really is concentrated at a point in the center. so, if you are a star or distant planet orbiting around a star that becomes a black hole, your orbit may not be significantly affected by the collapse of the star (although it may be affected by any mass loss that precedes the collapse). if, on the other hand, you venture close to the event horizon, it would be very hard for you to resist the “pull” of the warped spacetime near the black hole. you have to get really close to the black hole to experience any significant effect. if another star or a spaceship were to pass one or two solar radii from a black hole, newton’s laws would be adequate to describe what would happen to it. only very near the event horizon of a black hole is the gravitation so strong that newton’s laws break down. the black hole remnant of a massive star coming into our neighborhood would be far, far safer to us than its earlier incarnation as a brilliant, hot star. gravity and time machines time machines are one of the favorite devices of science fiction.
such a device would allow you to move through time at a different pace or in a different direction from everyone else. general relativity suggests that it is possible, in theory, to construct a time machine using gravity that could take you into the future. let’s imagine a place where gravity is terribly strong, such as near a very massive black hole. general relativity predicts that the stronger the gravity, the slower the pace of time (as seen by a distant observer). so, imagine a future astronaut, with a strongly built spaceship with fantastically powerful rockets, who volunteers to go on a mission to such a high-gravity environment. the astronaut leaves in the year 2222, just after graduating from college at age 22. she takes, let’s say, exactly 10 years to get to the black hole. once there, she orbits close to it (but not inside the event horizon), taking care not to get pulled in. she is now in a high-gravity realm where time passes more slowly than it does on earth. this isn’t just an effect on the mechanism of her clocks—time itself is running slowly. that means that every way she has of measuring time will give the same slowed-down reading when compared to time passing on earth.