to measure their distances requires a very large baseline and highly precise angular measurements. the moon is the only object near enough that its distance can be found fairly accurately with measurements made without a telescope. ptolemy determined the distance to the moon correctly to within a few percent. he used the turning earth itself as a baseline, measuring the position of the moon relative to the stars at two different times of night. with the aid of telescopes, later astronomers were able to measure the distances to the nearer planets and asteroids using earth’s diameter as a baseline. this is how the au was first established. to reach for the stars, however, requires a much longer baseline for triangulation and extremely sensitive measurements. such a baseline is provided by earth’s annual trip around the sun. distances to stars as earth travels from one side of its orbit to the other, it graciously provides us with a baseline of 2 au, or about 300 million kilometers. although this is a much bigger baseline than the diameter of earth, the stars are so far away that the resulting parallax shift is still not visible to the naked eye—not even for the closest stars.
in the chapter on observing the sky: the birth of astronomy, we discussed how this dilemma perplexed the ancient greeks, some of whom had actually suggested that the sun might be the center of the solar system, with earth in motion around it. aristotle and others argued, however, that earth could not be revolving about the sun. if it were, they said, we would surely observe the parallax of the nearer stars against the background of more distant objects as we viewed the sky from different parts of earth’s orbit (figure 19.6). tycho brahe (1546–1601) advanced the same faulty argument nearly 2000 years later, when his careful measurements of 642 19 • celestial distances access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page660_img1.jpeg] stellar positions with the unaided eye revealed no such shift. these early observers did not realize how truly distant the stars were and how small the change in their positions therefore was, even with the entire orbit of earth as a baseline. the problem was that they did not have tools to measure parallax shifts too small to be seen with the human eye.
by the eighteenth century, when there was no longer serious doubt about earth’s revolution, it became clear that the stars must be extremely distant. astronomers equipped with telescopes began to devise instruments capable of measuring the tiny shifts of nearby stars relative to the background of more distant (and thus unshifting) celestial objects. this was a significant technical challenge, since, even for the nearest stars, parallax angles are usually only a fraction of a second of arc. recall that one second of arc (arcsec) is an angle of only 1/3600 of a degree. a coin the size of a us quarter would appear to have a diameter of 1 arcsecond if you were viewing it from a distance of about 5 kilometers (3 miles). think about how small an angle that is. no wonder it took astronomers a long time before they could measure such tiny shifts.
the first successful detections of stellar parallax were in the year 1838, when friedrich bessel in germany (figure 19.5), thomas henderson, a scottish astronomer working at the cape of good hope, and friedrich struve in russia independently measured the parallaxes of the stars 61 cygni, alpha centauri, and vega, respectively. even the closest star, alpha centauri, showed a total displacement of only about 1.5 arcseconds during the course of a year. figure 19.5 friedrich wilhelm bessel (1784–1846), thomas j. henderson (1798–1844), and friedrich struve (1793–1864). (a) bessel made the first authenticated measurement of the distance to a star (61 cygni) in 1838, a feat that had eluded many dedicated astronomers for almost a century. but two others, (b) scottish astronomer thomas j. henderson and (c) friedrich struve, in russia, were close on his heels. figure 19.6 shows how such measurements work.