the diameters of globular star clusters range from 50 light-years to more than 450 light-years. open clusters open clusters are found in the disk of the galaxy. they have a range of ages, some as old as, or even older than, our sun. the youngest open clusters are still associated with the interstellar matter from which they formed. open clusters are smaller than globular clusters, usually having diameters of less than 30 light-years, and they typically contain only several dozen to several hundreds of stars (figure 22.7). the stars in open clusters usually appear well separated from one another, even in the central regions, which explains why they are called “open.” our galaxy contains thousands of open clusters, but we can see only a small fraction of them. interstellar dust, which is also concentrated in the disk, dims the light of more distant clusters so much that they are undetectable. figure 22.7 jewel box (ngc 4755). this open cluster of young, bright stars is about 6400 light-years away from the sun. note the contrast in color between the bright yellow supergiant and the hot blue main-sequence stars.
the name comes from john herschel’s nineteenth-century description of it as “a casket of variously colored precious stones.” (credit: eso/y. beletsky) although the individual stars in an open cluster can survive for billions of years, the typical open cluster remains together as a cluster for only a few million years, or at most, a few hundred million years. there are several reasons for this. in small open clusters, the average speed of the member stars within the cluster may be higher than the cluster’s escape velocity,1 and the stars will gradually “evaporate” from the cluster. close encounters of member stars may also increase the velocity of one of the members beyond the escape velocity. every few hundred million years or so, the cluster may have a close encounter with a giant molecular cloud, and the gravitational force exerted by the cloud may tear the cluster apart. several open clusters are visible to the unaided eye. most famous among them is the pleiades (figure 20.13), 1 escape velocity is the speed needed to overcome the gravity of some object or group of objects.
the rockets we send up from earth, for example, must travel faster than the escape velocity of our planet to be able to get to other worlds. 750 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page768_img1.jpeg] which appears as a tiny group of six stars (some people can see even more than six, and the pleiades is sometimes called the seven sisters). this cluster is arranged like a small dipping spoon and is seen in the constellation of taurus, the bull. a good pair of binoculars shows dozens of stars in the cluster, and a telescope reveals hundreds. (a car company, subaru, takes its name from the japanese term for this cluster; you can see the star group on the subaru logo.) the hyades is another famous open cluster in the constellation of taurus the bull. to the naked eye, it appears as a v-shaped group of faint stars marking the face of the bull. telescopes show that hyades actually contains more than 200 stars.
stellar associations an association is a group of extremely young stars, typically containing 5 to 50 hot, bright o and b stars scattered over a region of space some 100–500 light-years in diameter. as an example, most of the stars in the constellation orion form one of the nearest stellar associations. associations also contain hundreds to thousands of low-mass stars, but these are much fainter and less conspicuous. the presence of really hot, luminous stars indicates that star formation in the association has occurred in the last million years or so. since o stars go through their entire lives in only about a million years, they would not still be around unless star formation has occurred recently. it is therefore not surprising that associations are found in regions rich in the gas and dust required to form new stars. it’s like a brand new building still surrounded by some of the construction materials used to build it and with the landscape still showing signs of construction. on the other hand, because associations, like ordinary open clusters, lie in regions occupied by dusty interstellar matter, many are hidden from our view.