(credit: modification of work by nasa, wolfgang brandner (jpl/ipac), eva k. grebel (university of washington), you-hua chu (university of illinois urbana- champaign)) chapter outline 20.1 the interstellar medium 20.2 interstellar gas 20.3 cosmic dust 20.4 cosmic rays 20.5 the life cycle of cosmic material 20.6 interstellar matter around the sun thinking ahead where do stars come from? we already know from earlier chapters that stars must die because ultimately they exhaust their nuclear fuel. we might hypothesize that new stars come into existence to replace the ones that die. in order to form new stars, however, we need the raw material to make them. it also turns out that stars eject mass throughout their lives (a kind of wind blows from their surface layers) and that material must go somewhere. what does this “raw material” of stars look like? how would you detect it, especially if it is not yet in the form of stars and cannot generate its own energy?
one of the most exciting discoveries of twentieth-century astronomy was that our galaxy contains vast quantities of this “raw material”—atoms or molecules of gas and tiny solid dust particles found between the stars. studying this diffuse matter between the stars helps us understand how new stars form and gives us important clues about our own origins billions of years ago. between the stars: gas and dust in space 20 [image: astronomy_openstax_page685_img1.jpeg] 20.1 the interstellar medium learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: astronomers refer to all the material between stars as interstellar matter; the entire collection of interstellar matter is called the interstellar medium (ism). some interstellar material is concentrated into giant clouds, each of which is known as a nebula (plural “nebulae,” latin for “clouds”). the best-known nebulae are the ones that we can see glowing or reflecting visible light; there are many pictures of these in this chapter. interstellar clouds do not last for the lifetime of the universe. instead, they are like clouds on earth, constantly shifting, merging with each other, growing, or dispersing. some become dense and massive enough to collapse under their own gravity, forming new stars.
when stars die, they, in turn, eject some of their material into interstellar space. this material can then form new clouds and begin the cycle over again. about 99% of the material between the stars is in the form of a gas—that is, it consists of individual atoms or molecules. the most abundant elements in this gas are hydrogen and helium (which we saw are also the most abundant elements in the stars), but the gas also includes other elements. some of the gas is in the form of molecules—combinations of atoms. the remaining 1% of the interstellar material is solid—frozen particles consisting of many atoms and molecules that are called interstellar grains or interstellar dust (figure 20.2). a typical dust grain consists of a core of rocklike material (silicates) or graphite surrounded by a mantle of ices; water, methane, and ammonia are probably the most abundant ices. figure 20.2 various types of interstellar matter. the reddish nebulae in this spectacular photograph glow with light emitted by hydrogen atoms. the darkest areas are clouds of dust that block the light from stars behind them.
the upper part of the picture is filled with the bluish glow of light reflected from hot stars embedded in the outskirts of a huge, cool cloud of dust and gas. the cool supergiant star antares can be seen as a big, reddish patch in the lower-left part of the picture. the star is shedding some of its outer atmosphere and is surrounded by a cloud of its own making that reflects the red light of the star. the red nebula in the middle right partially surrounds the star sigma scorpii. (to the right of antares, you can see m4, a much more distant cluster of extremely old explain how much interstellar matter there is in the milky way, and what its typical density is describe how the interstellar medium is divided into gaseous and solid components 668 20 • between the stars: gas and dust in space access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page686_img1.jpeg] stars.) (credit: modification of work by eso/digitized sky survey 2) if all the interstellar gas within the galaxy were spread out smoothly, there would be only about one atom of gas per cm3 in interstellar space.