the primary mirror of these giant telescopes will consist of smaller mirrors, all aligned so that they act as a very large mirror in combination. the most ambitious of these projects is the european extremely large telescope (elt) (figure 6.28). (astronomers try to outdo each other not only with the size of these telescopes, but also their names!) the describe the next generation of ground- and space-based observatories explain some of the challenges involved in building these observatories 1 the observatory is named after the american astronomer whose work led us to the understanding that much of the universe is made of a mysterious substance that scientists call dark matter (which we explain in the mass of the galaxy). 214 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page232_img1.jpeg] design of the european elt calls for a 39.3-meter primary mirror, which will follow the keck design and be made up of 798 hexagonal mirrors, each 1.4 meters in diameter and all held precisely in position so that they form a continuous surface.
construction on the site in the atacama desert in northern chile started in 2014, and operations are expected to begin in about 2025. international consortia with major contributions from u.s. astronomers have developed plans for the construction of two large new telescopes. one is a thirty-meter telescope (tmt) for which the preferred site is maunakea in hawaii. the design of this telescope is similar to that of the european elt and will make use of 492 hexagonal elements. each segment is about 1.44 meters (56.6 inches) across corners. the segments are closely spaced, with gaps between the segments only 2.5 mm (0.1 inch) wide. the giant magellan telescope (gmt) is the second elt project with major participation by u.s. astronomers. the gmt is also a segmented mirror telescope that employs seven stiff monolith 8.4-meter mirrors as segments. construction has started at the selected site, which is near the las campanas observatory on the southern edge of the atacama desert. these giant telescopes will combine light-gathering power with high-resolution imaging. these powerful new instruments will enable astronomers to tackle many important astronomical problems.
as just one example, they provide us images and spectra of planets around other stars and thus, perhaps, give us the first real evidence (from the chemistry of these planets’ atmospheres) that life exists elsewhere. figure 6.28 artist’s conception of the european extremely large telescope. the primary mirror in this telescope is 39.3 meters across. the telescope is under construction in the atacama desert in northern chile. (credit: eso/l. calçada) check out this fun diagram (https://openstax.org/l/30jwstdiag) comparing the sizes of the largest planned and existing telescopes to a regulation basketball and tennis court.