however, to do so requires that the rapidly evolving central star hasn’t yet driven away the gas in the disk with its increasingly vigorous wind (see the earlier section on star formation). from observations, we see that the disk can be blown away within 10 million years, so growth of a giant planet must also be a very fast process, astronomically speaking. debris disks and shepherd planets the dust around newly formed stars is gradually either incorporated into the growing planets in the newly forming planetary system or ejected through gravitational interactions with the planets into space. the dust will disappear after about 30 million years unless the disk is continually supplied with new material. local comets and asteroids are the most likely sources of new dust. as the planet-size bodies grow, they stir up the orbits of smaller objects in the area. these small bodies collide at high speeds, shatter, and produce tiny particles of silicate dust and ices that can keep the disk supplied with the debris from these collisions. over several hundred million years, the comets and asteroids will gradually be reduced in number, the frequency of collisions will go down, and the supply of fresh dust will diminish. remember that the heavy bombardment in the early solar system ended when the sun was only about 500 million years old.
observations show that the dusty “debris disks” around stars also become largely undetectable by the time the stars reach an age of 400 to 500 million years. it is likely, however, that some small amount of cometary material will remain in orbit, much like our kuiper belt, a flattened disk of comets outside the orbit of neptune. in a young planetary system, even if we cannot see the planets directly, the planets can concentrate the dust particles into clumps and arcs that are much larger than the planets themselves and more easily imaged. this is similar to how the tiny moons of saturn shepherd the particles in the rings and produce large arcs and structures in saturn’s rings. debris disks—many with just such clumps and arcs—have now been found around many stars, such as hl tau, located about 450 light-years from earth in the constellation taurus (figure 21.15). in some stars, the brightness of the rings varies with position; around other stars, there are bright arcs and gaps in the rings. the brightness indicates the relative concentration of dust, since what we are seeing is infrared (heat radiation) from the dust particles in the rings. more dust means more radiation.
714 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org figure 21.15 dust ring around a young star and three nested dust belts around the star fomalhaut. (a) this image was made by alma (the atacama large millimeter/submillimeter array) at a wavelength of 1.3 millimeters and shows the young star hl tau and its protoplanetary disk. it reveals multiple rings and gaps that indicate the presence of emerging planets, which are sweeping their orbits clear of dust and gas. (b) the james webb space telescope took this infrared image of three belts in the debris disk of the hot, young star fomalhaut, about 25 lightyears away. the belts extend outward for about 150 au or 23 billion km, roughly twice the size of our own kuiper belt. although the disk was discovered in 1983, the presence of the inner belts was revealed by jwst for the first time.
(credit a: modification of work by alma (eso/naoj/nrao); credit b: modification of work by nasa/esa) 21.3 • evidence that planets form around other stars 715 [image: astronomy_openstax_page733_img1.jpeg] watch a short video clip (https://openstax.org/l/30vidnraodir) of the director of nrao (national radio astronomy observatory) describing the high-resolution observations of the young star hl tau. while you’re there, watch an artist’s animation of a protoplanetary disk to see newly formed planets traveling around a host (parent) star. 21.4 planets beyond the solar system: search and discovery learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: for centuries, astronomers have dreamed of finding planets around other stars, including other planets like earth. direct observations of such distant planets are very difficult, however. you might compare a planet orbiting a star to a mosquito flying around one of those giant spotlights at a shopping center opening. from close up, you might spot the mosquito. but imagine viewing the scene from some distance away—say, from an airplane.