geologist (and later us senator) harrison “jack” schmitt in front of a large boulder in the littrow valley at the edge of the lunar highlands. note how black the sky is on the airless moon. no stars are visible because the surface is brightly lit by the sun, and the exposure therefore is not long enough to reveal stars. in addition to landing on the lunar surface and studying it at close range, the apollo missions accomplished three objectives of major importance for lunar science. first, the astronauts collected nearly 400 kilograms of samples for detailed laboratory analysis on earth (figure 9.4). these samples have revealed as much about the moon and its history as all other lunar studies combined. second, each apollo landing after the first one deployed an apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep), which continued to operate for years after the astronauts departed. third, the orbiting apollo command modules carried a wide range of instruments to photograph and analyze the lunar surface from above. figure 9.4 handling moon rocks. lunar samples collected in the apollo project are analyzed and stored in nasa facilities at the johnson space center in houston, texas.
here, a technician examines a rock sample using gloves in a sealed environment to avoid contaminating the sample. (credit: nasa jsc) the last human left the moon in december 1972, just a little more than three years after neil armstrong took his “giant leap for mankind.” the program of lunar exploration was cut off midstride due to political and economic pressures. it had cost just about $100 per american, spread over 10 years—the equivalent of one large pizza per person per year. yet for many people, the moon landings were one of the central events in twentieth-century history. 292 9 • cratered worlds access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page310_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page310_img2.jpeg] the giant apollo rockets built to travel to the moon were left to rust on the lawns of nasa centers, although recently, some have at least been moved indoors to museums (figure 9.5). it has been more than 50 years since astronauts landed on the moon, but now there is increased interest in both the united states and china in future human lunar flights.
nasa has established a program called artemis, named for the twin of the ancient greek god apollo, which plans to place astronauts in lunar orbit by the mid-2020s. the first test flight of the huge new space launch system rocket sent an uncrewed vehicle around the moon and back in late 2022. artemis will focus on landings near the lunar poles, and nasa will include both women and people of color in the astronaut crews. china is one other country that has expressed interest in sending humans to the moon, and in late 2022, they completed their own space station in earth orbit as a first step. in a bizarre piece of irony, a few people even question whether we went to the moon at all, proposing instead that the apollo program was a fake, filmed on a hollywood sound stage. see the link to learning box below for some scientists’ replies to such claims. in the meantime, scientific interest in the moon is stronger than ever, and more than half a dozen scientific spacecraft—sent from nasa, esa, japan, india, and china—have orbited or landed on our nearest neighbor during the past two decades.
read the great moon hoax (https://openstax.org/l/30greatmoonhoax) about the claim that nasa never succeeded in putting people on the moon. figure 9.5 moon rocket on display. one of the unused saturn 5 rockets built to go to the moon is now a tourist attraction at nasa’s johnson space center in houston, although it has been moved indoors since this photo was taken. (credit: modification of work by david morrison) lunar exploration has become an international enterprise with many robotic spacecraft focusing on lunar science. the ussr sent a number in the 1960s, including robot sample returns, and recently china has been active, with three landers and a sample return mission. of special interest is the search for accessible water ice near the lunar south pole. table 9.3 lists some of the most recent lunar missions.