to learn more about hipparcos, explore this european space agency webpage (https://openstax.org/l/ 30hipparcos) with an esa vodcast charting the galaxy—from hipparcos to gaia. 19.3 variable stars: one key to cosmic distances learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: let’s briefly review the key reasons that measuring distances to the stars is such a struggle. as discussed in the brightness of stars, our problem is that stars come in a bewildering variety of intrinsic luminosities. (if stars were light bulbs, we’d say they come in a wide range of wattages.) suppose, instead, that all stars had the same “wattage” or luminosity. in that case, the more distant ones would always look dimmer, and we could tell how far away a star is simply by how dim it appeared. in the real universe, however, when we look at a star in our sky (with eye or telescope) and measure its apparent brightness, we cannot know whether it looks dim because it’s a low-wattage bulb or because it is far away, or perhaps some of each.
astronomers need to discover something else about the star that allows us to “read off” its intrinsic luminosity—in effect, to know what the star’s true wattage is. with this information, we can then attribute how dim it looks from earth to its distance. recall that the apparent brightness of an object decreases with the square of the distance to that object. if two objects have the same luminosity but one is three times farther link to learning describe how some stars vary their light output and why such stars are important explain the importance of pulsating variable stars, such as cepheids and rr lyrae-type stars, to our study of the universe 650 19 • celestial distances access for free at openstax.org than the other, the more distant one will look nine times fainter. therefore, if we know the luminosity of a star and its apparent brightness, we can calculate how far away it is. astronomers have long searched for techniques that would somehow allow us to determine the luminosity of a star—and it is to these techniques that we turn next. variable stars the breakthrough in measuring distances to remote parts of our galaxy, and to other galaxies as well, came from the study of variable stars.
most stars are constant in their luminosity, at least to within a percent or two. like the sun, they generate a steady flow of energy from their interiors. however, some stars are seen to vary in brightness and, for this reason, are called variable stars. many such stars vary on a regular cycle, like the flashing bulbs that decorate stores and homes during the winter holidays. let’s define some tools to help us keep track of how a star varies. a graph that shows how the brightness of a variable star changes with time is called a light curve (figure 19.9). the maximum is the point of the light curve where the star has its greatest brightness; the minimum is the point where it is faintest. if the light variations repeat themselves periodically, the interval between the two maxima is called the period of the star. (if this kind of graph looks familiar, it is because we introduced it in diameters of stars.) figure 19.9 cepheid light curve. this light curve shows how the brightness changes with time for a typical cepheid variable, with a period of about 6 days. pulsating variables there are two special types of variable stars for which—as we will see—measurements of the light curve give us accurate distances.
these are called cepheid and rr lyrae variables, both of which are pulsating variable stars. such a star actually changes its diameter with time—periodically expanding and contracting, as your chest does when you breathe. we now understand that these stars are going through a brief unstable stage late in their lives. the expansion and contraction of pulsating variables can be measured by using the doppler effect. the lines in the spectrum shift toward the blue as the surface of the star moves toward us and then shift to the red as the surface shrinks back. as the star pulsates, it also changes its overall color, indicating that its temperature is also varying. and, most important for our purposes, the luminosity of the pulsating variable also changes in a regular way as it expands and contracts. cepheid variables cepheids are large, yellow, pulsating stars named for the first-known star of the group, delta cephei. this, by the way, is another example of how confusing naming conventions get in astronomy; here, a whole class of stars is named after the constellation in which the first one happened to be found.