as we will see later in this chapter, most jupiter-family comets come from a different source than the long- period comets (those with orbital periods longer than about a century). observational records exist for thousands of comets. we were visited by two bright comets in recent decades. first, in march 1996, came comet hyakutake, with a very long tail. a year later, comet hale-bopp appeared; it was as bright as the brightest stars and remained visible for several weeks, even in urban areas (see the image that opens this chapter, figure 13.1) since then, there have been few comets visible to the naked eye, and astronomers (both professional and amateur) eagerly await such a visitor. table 13.2 lists some well-known comets whose history or appearance is of special interest.
452 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page470_img1.jpeg] some interesting comets name period significance great comet of 1577 long tycho brahe showed it was beyond the moon (a big step in our understanding) great comet of 1843 long brightest recorded comet; visible in daytime daylight comet of 1910 long brightest comet of the twentieth century west long nucleus broke into pieces (1976) hyakutake long passed within 15 million km of earth (1996) hale–bopp long brightest recent comet (1997) swift-tuttle 133 years parent comet of perseid meteor shower halley 76 years first comet found to be periodic; explored by spacecraft in 1986 borrelly 6.8 years flyby by deep space 1 spacecraft (2000) biela 6.7 years broke up in 1846 and not seen again churyumov- gerasimenko 6.5 years target of rosetta mission (2014–16) wild 2 6.4 years target of stardust sample return mission (2004) tempel 1 5.7 years target of deep impact mission (2005) encke 3.3 years shortest known period table 13.2 the comet’s nucleus when we look at an active comet, all we normally see is its temporary atmosphere of gas and dust illuminated by sunlight.
this atmosphere is called the comet’s head or coma. since the gravity of such small bodies is very weak, the atmosphere is rapidly escaping all the time; it must be replenished by new material, which has to come from somewhere. the source is the small, solid nucleus inside, just a few kilometers across, usually hidden by the glow from the much-larger atmosphere surrounding it. the nucleus is the real comet, the fragment of ancient icy material responsible for the atmosphere and the tail (figure 13.18). 13.3 • the “long-haired” comets 453 figure 13.18 parts of a comet. this schematic illustration shows the main parts of a comet. note that the different structures are not to scale. the modern theory of the physical and chemical nature of comets was first proposed by harvard astronomer fred whipple in 1950. before whipple’s work, many astronomers thought that a comet’s nucleus might be a loose aggregation of solids, sort of an orbiting “gravel bank,” whipple proposed instead that the nucleus is a solid object a few kilometers across, composed in substantial part of water ice (but with other ices as well) mixed with silicate grains and dust.
this proposal became known as the “dirty snowball” model. the water vapor and other volatiles that escape from the nucleus when it is heated can be detected in the comet’s head and tail, and therefore, we can use spectra to analyze what atoms and molecules the nucleus ice consists of. however, we are somewhat less certain of the non-icy component. we have never identified a fragment of solid matter from a comet that has survived passage through earth’s atmosphere. however, spacecraft that have approached comets have carried dust detectors, and some comet dust has even been returned to earth (see figure 13.19). it seems that much of the “dirt” in the dirty snowball is dark, primitive hydrocarbons and silicates, rather like the material thought to be present on the dark, primitive asteroids. figure 13.19 captured comet dust. this particle (seen through a microscope) is believed to be a tiny fragment of cometary dust, collected in the upper atmosphere of earth. it measures about 10 microns, or 1/100 of a millimeter, across. (credit: nasa/jpl) since the nuclei of comets are small and dark, they are difficult to study from earth.