third, we need some type of detector, a device that senses the radiation in the wavelength regions we have chosen and permanently records the observations. figure 6.2 orion region at different wavelengths. the same part of the sky looks different when observed with instruments that are sensitive to different bands of the spectrum. (a) visible light: this shows part of the orion region as the human eye sees it, with dotted lines added to show the figure of the mythical hunter, orion. (b) x-rays: here, the view emphasizes the point-like x-ray sources nearby. the colors are artificial, changing from yellow to white to blue with increasing energy of the x-rays. the bright, hot stars in orion are still seen in this image, but so are many other objects located at very different distances, including other stars, star corpses, and galaxies at the edge of the observable universe. (c) infrared radiation: here, we mainly see the glowing dust in this region. (credit a: modification of work by howard mccallon/nasa/iras; credit b: modification of work by howard mccallon/nasa/ iras; credit c: modification of work by michael f.
corcoran) the history of the development of astronomical telescopes is about how new technologies have been applied to improve the efficiency of these three basic components: the telescopes, the wavelength-sorting device, and the detectors. let’s first look at the development of the telescope. many ancient cultures built special sites for observing the sky (figure 6.3). at these ancient observatories, they could measure the positions of celestial objects, mostly to keep track of time and date. many of these ancient observatories had religious and ritual functions as well. the eye was the only device available to gather light, all of the colors in the light were observed at once, and the only permanent record of the observations was made by human beings writing down or sketching what they saw. describe the three basic components of a modern system for measuring astronomical sources describe the main functions of a telescope describe the two basic types of visible-light telescopes and how they form images 182 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page200_img1.jpeg] figure 6.3 two pre-telescopic observatories. (a) machu picchu is a fifteenth century incan site located in peru.
(b) stonehenge, a prehistoric site (3000–2000 bce), is located in england. (credit a: modification of work by allard schmidt) while hans lippershey, zaccharias janssen, and jacob metius are all credited with the invention of the telescope around 1608—applying for patents within weeks of each other—it was galileo who, in 1610, used this simple tube with lenses (which he called a spyglass) to observe the sky and gather more light than his eyes alone could. even his small telescope—used over many nights—revolutionized ideas about the nature of the planets and the position of earth. how telescopes work telescopes have come a long way since galileo’s time. now they tend to be huge devices; the most expensive cost hundreds of millions to billions of dollars.
(to provide some reference point, however, keep in mind that just renovating college football stadiums typically costs hundreds of millions of dollars—with the most expensive recent renovation, at texas a&m university’s kyle field, costing $450 million.) the reason astronomers keep building bigger and bigger telescopes is that celestial objects—such as planets, stars, and galaxies—send much more light to earth than any human eye (with its tiny opening) can catch, and bigger telescopes can detect fainter objects. if you have ever watched the stars with a group of friends, you know that there’s plenty of starlight to go around; each of you can see each of the stars. if a thousand more people were watching, each of them would also catch a bit of each star’s light. yet, as far as you are concerned, the light not shining into your eye is wasted. it would be great if some of this “wasted” light could also be captured and brought to your eye. this is precisely what a telescope does. the most important functions of a telescope are (1) to collect the faint light from an astronomical source and (2) to focus all the light into a point or an image.