the milky way is seen to the right of the dome, and the large and small magellanic clouds are seen to the left. (credit: roger smith/noao/ aura/nsf) the small magellanic cloud is considerably less massive than the large magellanic cloud, and it is six times longer than it is wide. this narrow wisp of material points directly toward our galaxy like an arrow. the small magellanic cloud was most likely contorted into its current shape through gravitational interactions with the milky way. a large trail of debris from this interaction between the milky way and the small magellanic cloud has been strewn across the sky and is seen as a series of gas clouds moving at abnormally high velocity, 26.2 • types of galaxies 905 [image: astronomy_openstax_page923_img1.jpeg] known as the magellanic stream. we will see that this kind of interaction between galaxies will help explain the irregular shapes of this whole category of small galaxies, view this beautiful album showcasing the different types of galaxies (https://openstax.org/l/ 30galaxphohubb) that have been photographed by the hubble space telescope.
galaxy evolution encouraged by the success of the h-r diagram for stars (see analyzing starlight), astronomers studying galaxies hoped to find some sort of comparable scheme, where differences in appearance could be tied to different evolutionary stages in the life of galaxies. wouldn’t it be nice if every elliptical galaxy evolved into a spiral, for example, just as every main-sequence star evolves into a red giant? several simple ideas of this kind were tried, some by hubble himself, but none stood the test of time (and observation). because no simple scheme for evolving one type of galaxy into another could be found, astronomers then tended to the opposite point of view. for a while, most astronomers thought that all galaxies formed very early in the history of the universe and that the differences between them had to do with the rate of star formation. ellipticals were those galaxies in which all the interstellar matter was converted rapidly into stars. spirals were galaxies in which star formation occurred slowly over the entire lifetime of the galaxy. this idea turned out to be too simple as well. today, we understand that at least some galaxies have changed types over the billions of years since the universe began.
as we shall see in later chapters, collisions and mergers between galaxies may dramatically change spiral galaxies into elliptical galaxies. even isolated spirals (with no neighbor galaxies in sight) can change their appearance over time. as they consume their gas, the rate of star formation will slow down, and the spiral arms will gradually become less conspicuous. over long periods, spirals therefore begin to look more like the galaxies at the middle of figure 26.6 (which astronomers refer to as s0 types). over the past several decades, the study of how galaxies evolve over the lifetime of the universe has become one of the most active fields of astronomical research. we will discuss the evolution of galaxies in more detail in the evolution and distribution of galaxies, but let’s first see in a little more detail just what different galaxies are like. 26.3 properties of galaxies learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the technique for deriving the masses of galaxies is basically the same as that used to estimate the mass of the sun, the stars, and our own galaxy.
we measure how fast objects in the outer regions of the galaxy are orbiting the center, and then we use this information along with kepler’s third law to calculate how much mass is inside that orbit. masses of galaxies astronomers can measure the rotation speed in spiral galaxies by obtaining spectra of either stars or gas, and looking for wavelength shifts produced by the doppler effect. remember that the faster something is moving toward or away from us, the greater the shift of the lines in its spectrum. kepler’s law, together with such link to learning describe the methods through which astronomers can estimate the mass of a galaxy characterize each type of galaxy by its mass-to-light ratio 906 26 • galaxies access for free at openstax.org observations of the part of the andromeda galaxy that is bright in visible light, for example, show it to have a galactic mass of about msun (enough material to make 400 billion stars like the sun). the total mass of the andromeda galaxy is greater than this, however, because we have not included the mass of the material that lies beyond its visible edge.