there is a fourth very important category of rock that can tell us much about the early history of the planetary denote the primary types of rock that constitute earth’s crust explain the theory of plate tectonics describe the difference between rift and subduction zones describe the relationship between fault zones and mountain building explain the various types of volcanic activity occurring on earth 260 8 • earth as a planet access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page278_img1.jpeg] system: primitive rock, which has largely escaped chemical modification by heating. primitive rock represents the original material out of which the planetary system was made. no primitive material is left on earth because the entire planet was heated early in its history. to find primitive rock, we must look to smaller objects such as comets, asteroids, and small planetary moons. we can sometimes see primitive rock in samples that fall to earth from these smaller objects. a block of quartzite on earth is composed of materials that have gone through all four of these states.
beginning as primitive material before earth was born, it was heated in the early earth to form igneous rock, transformed chemically and redeposited (perhaps many times) to form sedimentary rock, and finally changed several kilometers below earth’s surface into the hard, white metamorphic stone we see today. plate tectonics geology is the study of earth’s crust and the processes that have shaped its surface throughout history. (although geo- means “related to earth,” astronomers and planetary scientists also talk about the geology of other planets.) heat escaping from the interior provides energy for the formation of our planet’s mountains, valleys, volcanoes, and even the continents and ocean basins themselves. but not until the middle of the twentieth century did geologists succeed in understanding just how these landforms are created. plate tectonics is an idea that explains how slow motions within the mantle of earth move large segments of the crust, resulting in a gradual “drifting” of the continents as well as the formation of mountains and other large-scale geological features. plate tectonics is a concept as basic to geology as evolution by natural selection is to biology or gravity is to understanding the orbits of planets.
looking at it from a different perspective, plate tectonics is a mechanism for earth to transport heat efficiently from the interior, where it has accumulated, out to space. it is a cooling system for the planet. all planets develop a heat transfer process as they evolve; mechanisms may differ from that on earth as a result of chemical makeup and other constraints. earth’s crust and upper mantle (to a depth of about 60 kilometers) are divided into about a dozen tectonic plates that fit together like the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle (figure 8.7). in some places, such as the atlantic ocean, the plates are moving apart; in others, such as off the western coast of south america, they are being forced together. the power to move the plates is provided by slow convection of the mantle, a process by which heat escapes from the interior through the upward flow of warmer material and the slow sinking of cooler material. (convection, in which energy is transported from a warm region, such as the interior of earth, to a cooler region, such as the upper mantle, is a process we encounter often in astronomy—in stars as well as planets.
it is also important in boiling water for coffee while studying for astronomy exams.) figure 8.7 earth’s continental plates. this map shows the major plates into which the crust of earth is divided. arrows indicate the 8.2 • earth’s crust 261 [image: astronomy_openstax_page279_img1.jpeg] motion of the plates at average speeds of 4 to 5 centimeters per year, similar to the rate at which your hair grows. the us geological survey provides a map of recent earthquakes (https://openstax.org/l/30geosurmapeart) and shows the boundaries of the tectonic plates and where earthquakes occur in relation to these boundaries. you can look close-up at the united states or zoom out for a global view. as the plates slowly move, they bump into each other and cause dramatic changes in earth’s crust over time. four basic kinds of interactions between crustal plates are possible at their boundaries: (1) they can pull apart, (2) one plate can burrow under another, (3) they can slide alongside each other, or (4) they can jam together. each of these activities is important in determining the geology of earth.