first, sometimes bright meteors (fireballs) are observed to penetrate the atmosphere to low altitudes. if we search the area beneath the point where the fireball burned out, we may find one or more remnants that reached the ground. observed meteorite falls, in other words, may lead to the recovery of fallen meteorites. (a few meteorites have even hit buildings or, very rarely, people; see making connections: some striking meteorites). the 2013 chelyabinsk fireball, which we discussed in the chapter on comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system, produced tens of thousands of small meteorites, many of them easy to find because these dark stones fell on snow. there are, however, many false alarms about meteorite falls. most observers of a bright fireball conclude that part of it hit the ground, but that is rarely the case. every few months news outlets report that a meteorite has been implicated in the start of a fire. such stories have always proved to be wrong. the meteorite is ice-cold in space, and most of its interior remains cold even after its brief fiery plunge through the atmosphere. a freshly fallen meteorite is more likely to acquire a coating of frost than to start a fire.
explain the origin of meteorites and the difference between a meteor and a meteorite describe how most meteorites have been found explain how primitive stone meteorites are significantly different from other types explain how the study of meteorites informs our understanding of the age of the solar system. 14.2 • meteorites: stones from heaven 481 people sometimes discover unusual-looking rocks that turn out to be meteoritic; these rocks are termed meteorite finds. now that the public has become meteorite-conscious, many unusual fragments, not all of which turn out to be from space, are sent to experts each year. some scientists divide these objects into two categories: “meteorites” and “meteorwrongs.” outside antarctica (see the next paragraph), genuine meteorites turn up at an average rate of 25 or so per year. most of these end up in natural history museums or specialized meteoritical laboratories throughout the world, although there is a growing group of private collectors interested in them as well. (figure 14.6) figure 14.6 meteorite find. (a) this early twentieth century photo shows a 15-ton iron meteorite found in the willamette valley in oregon.
although known to native americans in the area, it was “discovered” by an enterprising local farmer in 1902, who proceeded to steal it and put it on display. (b) it was eventually purchased for the american museum of natural history and is now on display in the museum’s rose center in new york city as the largest iron meteorite in the united states. in this 1911 photo, two young boys are perched in the meteor’s crevices. since the 1980s, sources in the antarctic have dramatically increased our knowledge of meteorites. more than ten thousand meteorites have been recovered from the antarctic as a result of the motion of the ice in some parts of that continent (figure 14.7). meteorites that fall in regions where ice accumulates are buried and then carried slowly to other areas where the ice is gradually worn away. after thousands of years, the rock again finds itself on the surface, along with other meteorites carried to these same locations. the ice thus concentrates the meteorites that have fallen both over a large area and over a long period of time.
once on the surface, the rocks stand out in contrast to the ice and are thus easier to spot than in other places on our rocky planet. figure 14.7 antarctic meteorite. (a) the us antarctic search for meteorites (ansmet) team recovers a meteorite from the antarctic 482 14 • cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page500_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page500_img2.jpeg] ice during a 2001–2002 mission. (b) the team is shown with some of the equipment used in the search. (credit a, b: modification of work by nasa) some striking meteorites although meteorites fall regularly onto earth’s surface, few of them have much of an impact on human civilization. there is so much water and uninhabited land on our planet that rocks from space typically fall where no one even sees them come down. but given the number of meteorites that land each year, you may not be surprised that a few have struck buildings, cars, and even people.