for example, the concept of sharply defined electron orbits is not really correct; however, at the level of this introductory course, the notion that only certain discrete energies are allowable for an atom is very useful. the energy levels we have been discussing can be thought of as representing certain average distances of the electron’s possible orbits from the atomic nucleus. ordinarily, an atom is in the state of lowest possible energy, its ground state. in the bohr model of the hydrogen atom, the ground state corresponds to the electron being in the innermost orbit. an atom can absorb energy, which raises it to a higher energy level (corresponding, in the simple bohr picture, to an electron’s movement to a larger orbit)—this is referred to as excitation. the atom is then said to be in an excited state. generally, an atom remains excited for only a very brief time. after a short interval, typically a hundred-millionth of a second or so, it drops back spontaneously to its ground state, with the simultaneous emission of light. the atom may return to its lowest state in one jump, or it may make the transition in steps of two or more jumps, stopping at intermediate levels on the way down.
with each jump, it emits a photon of the wavelength that corresponds to the energy difference between the levels at the beginning and end of that jump. an energy-level diagram for a hydrogen atom and several possible atomic transitions are shown in figure 5.20. when we measure the energies involved as the atom jumps between levels, we find that the transitions to or from the ground state, called the lyman series of lines, result in the emission or absorption of ultraviolet 166 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page184_img1.jpeg] photons. but the transitions to or from the first excited state (labeled n = 2 in part (a) of figure 5.20), called the balmer series, produce emission or absorption in visible light. in fact, it was to explain this balmer series that bohr first suggested his model of the atom. figure 5.20 energy-level diagrams for hydrogen. (a) here we follow the emission or absorption of photons by a hydrogen atom according to the bohr model. several different series of spectral lines are shown, corresponding to transitions of electrons from or to certain allowed orbits.
each series of lines that terminates on a specific inner orbit is named for the physicist who studied it. at the top, for example, you see the balmer series, and arrows show electrons jumping from the second orbit (n = 2) to the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth orbits. each time a “poor” electron from a lower level wants to rise to a higher position in life, it must absorb energy to do so. it can absorb the energy it needs from passing waves (or photons) of light. the next set of arrows (lyman series) show electrons falling down to the first orbit from different (higher) levels. each time a “rich” electron goes downward toward the nucleus, it can afford to give off (emit) some energy it no longer needs. (in this idealized diagram, the energy levels are shown equally spaced; in real life, they are not.) (b) at higher and higher energy levels, the levels become more and more crowded together, approaching a limit. the region above the top line represents energies at which the atom is ionized (the electron is no longer attached to the atom).
each series of arrows represents electrons falling from higher levels to lower ones, releasing photons or waves of energy in the process. atoms that have absorbed specific photons from a passing beam of white light and have thus become excited generally de-excite themselves and emit that light again in a very short time. you might wonder, then, why dark spectral lines are ever produced. in other words, why doesn’t this reemitted light quickly “fill in” the darker absorption lines? imagine a beam of white light coming toward you through some cooler gas. some of the reemitted light is actually returned to the beam of white light you see, but this fills in the absorption lines only to a slight extent. the reason is that the atoms in the gas reemit light in all directions, and only a small fraction of the reemitted light is in the direction of the original beam (toward you). in a star, much of the reemitted light actually goes in directions leading back into the star, which does observers outside the star no good whatsoever. figure 5.21 summarizes the different kinds of spectra we have discussed. an incandescent lightbulb produces a continuous spectrum.