this graph shows how the scale factor of the observable universe changes with time for the standard big bang model (red line) and for the inflationary model (blue line). (note that the time scale at the bottom is extremely compressed.) during inflation, regions that were very small and in contact with each other are suddenly blown up to be much larger and outside each other’s horizon distance. the two models are the same for all times after 10–30 second. prior to (and during) inflation, all the parts of the universe that we can now see were so small and close to each other that they could exchange information, that is, the horizon distance included all of the universe that we can now observe. before (and during) inflation, there was adequate time for the observable universe to homogenize itself and come to the same temperature. then, inflation expanded those regions tremendously, so that many parts of the universe are now beyond each other’s horizon. another appeal of the inflationary model is its prediction that the density of the universe should be exactly equal to the critical density. to see why this is so, remember that curvature of spacetime is intimately linked to the density of matter.
if the universe began with some curvature of its spacetime, one analogy for it might be the skin of a balloon. the period of inflation was equivalent to blowing up the balloon to a tremendous size. the universe became so big that from our vantage point, no curvature should be visible (figure 29.26). in the same way, earth’s surface is so big that it looks flat to us no matter where we are. calculations show that a universe with no curvature is one that is at critical density. universes with densities either higher or lower than the critical density would show marked curvature. but we saw that the observations of the cmb in figure 29.18, which show that the universe has critical density, rule out the possibility that space is significantly curved. 29.6 • the inflationary universe 1041 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1059_img1.jpeg] figure 29.26 analogy for inflation. during a period of rapid inflation, a curved balloon grows so large that to any local observer it looks flat. the inset shows the geometry from the ant’s point of view. grand unified theories while inflation is an intriguing idea and widely accepted by researchers, we cannot directly observe events so early in the universe.
the conditions at the time of inflation were so extreme that we cannot reproduce them in our laboratories or high-energy accelerators, but scientists have some ideas about what the universe might have been like. these ideas are called grand unified theories or guts. in gut models, the forces that we are familiar with here on earth, including gravity and electromagnetism, behaved very differently in the extreme conditions of the early universe than they do today. in physical science, the term force is used to describe anything that can change the motion of a particle or body. one of the remarkable discoveries of modern science is that all known physical processes can be described through the action of just four forces: gravity, electromagnetism, the strong nuclear force, and the weak nuclear force (table 29.3). the forces of nature force relative strength today range of action important applications gravity 1 whole universe motions of planets, stars, galaxies electromagnetism 1036 whole universe atoms, molecules, electricity, magnetic fields weak nuclear force 1033 10–17 meters radioactive decay strong nuclear force 1038 10–15 meters the existence of atomic nuclei table 29.3 gravity is perhaps the most familiar force, and certainly appears strong if you jump off a tall building.
however, the force of gravity between two elementary particles—say two protons—is by far the weakest of the four forces. electromagnetism—which includes both magnetic and electrical forces, holds atoms together, and 1042 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1060_img1.jpeg] produces the electromagnetic radiation that we use to study the universe—is much stronger, as you can see in table 29.3. the weak nuclear force is only weak in comparison to its strong “cousin,” but it is in fact much stronger than gravity. both the weak and strong nuclear forces differ from the first two forces in that they act only over very small distances—those comparable to the size of an atomic nucleus or less. the weak force is involved in radioactive decay and in reactions that result in the production of neutrinos. the strong force holds protons and neutrons together in an atomic nucleus. physicists have wondered why there are four forces in the universe—why not 300 or, preferably, just one? an important hint comes from the name electromagnetic force.