summaries give the gist of each section for easy review. for further exploration. this section offers a list of suggested articles, websites, and videos so students can delve into topics of interest, whether for their own learning, for homework, extra credit, or papers. review questions. review questions allow students to show you (or themselves) how well they understood the chapter. thought questions. thought questions help students assess their learning by asking for critical reflection on principles or ideas in the chapter. figuring for yourself. mathematical questions, using only basic algebra and arithmetic, allow students to apply the math principles given in the example boxes throughout the chapter. collaborative group activities. this section suggests ideas for group discussion, research, or reports. beautiful art program our comprehensive art program is designed to enhance students’ understanding of concepts through clear and effective illustrations, diagrams, and photographs. here are a few examples. preface 3 figure 1 how a pulsar beam sweeps over earth. figure 2 structure of the milky way galaxy. 4 preface access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page22_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page22_img2.jpeg] figure 3 masses in the stellar graveyard.
figure 4 pluto close up. preface 5 [image: astronomy_openstax_page23_img1.png] [image: astronomy_openstax_page23_img2.jpeg] answers to questions in the book in order to allow instructors as much flexibility as possible, answers are provided only to instructors via the instructor resources. due to the high variability of responses, aswers to collaborative group activities are not provided. additional resources student and instructor resources we’ve compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including getting started guides, powerpoint slides, and an instructor answer guide. instructor resources require a verified instructor account, which you can apply for when you log in or create your account on openstax.org. take advantage of these resources to supplement your openstax book. community hubs openstax partners with the institute for the study of knowledge management in education (iskme) to offer community hubs on oer commons – a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that support openstax books, free of charge. through our community hubs, instructors can upload their own materials or download resources to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching material, multimedia, and relevant course content.
we encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects most relevant to your teaching and research as an opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with other faculty. to reach the community hubs, visit https://www.oercommons.org/groups/openstax-astronomy/ 1283/?__hub_id=27 (https://www.oercommons.org/groups/openstax-astronomy/1283/?__hub_id=27). partner resources openstax partners are our allies in the mission to make high-quality learning materials affordable and accessible to students and instructors everywhere. their tools integrate seamlessly with our openstax titles at a low cost. to access the partner resources for your text, visit your book page on openstax.org. about the authors senior contributing authors figure 5 senior contributing authors: andrew fraknoi (left), david morrison (center), sidney c. wolff (right) andrew fraknoi, fromm institute, university of san francisco andrew fraknoi retired as chair of the astronomy department at foothill college in 2017 and now teaches courses for older adults at the university of san francisco and san francisco state university.
he served as the executive director of the astronomical society of the pacific from 1978–1992. his work with the society included editing mercury magazine, the universe in the classroom newsletter, and astronomy beat. he is editor/co-author of the universe at your fingertips 2.0, a collection of teaching activities, and co-author of 6 preface access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page24_img1.jpeg] solar science, a book for middle-school teachers. he was also co-author of a syndicated newspaper column on astronomy, and appears regularly on local and national radio. with sidney wolff, he was founder of the refereed journal, astronomy education review. in addition, he has organized six national symposia on teaching introductory astronomy, and for 10 years, has led the aas ambassadors workshops, training young astronomers to be better at outreach. he received the aas education award, the klumpke-roberts prize of the asp, the gemant prize of the american institute of physics, and the faraday award of the nsta.