geological activity the crusts of all of the terrestrial planets, as well as of the larger moons, and pluto, have been modified over their histories by both internal and external forces. externally, each has been battered by a slow rain of projectiles from space, leaving their surfaces pockmarked by impact craters of all sizes (see figure 7.4). we have good evidence that this bombardment was far greater in the early history of the solar system, but it certainly continues to this day, even if at a lower rate. the collision of more than 20 large pieces of comet shoemaker–levy 9 with jupiter in the summer of 1994 (see figure 7.13) is one dramatic example of this process. figure 7.13 comet shoemaker–levy 9. in this image of comet shoemaker–levy 9 taken on may 17, 1994, by nasa’s hubble space telescope, you can see about 20 icy fragments into which the comet broke. the comet was approximately 660 million kilometers from earth, heading on a collision course with jupiter. (credit: modification of work by nasa, esa, h. weaver (stscl), e.
smith (stscl)) figure 7.14 shows the aftermath of these collisions, when debris clouds larger than earth could be seen in jupiter’s atmosphere. astronomy basics 240 7 • other worlds: an introduction to the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page258_img1.jpeg] figure 7.14 jupiter with huge dust clouds. the hubble space telescope took this sequence of images of jupiter in summer 1994, when fragments of comet shoemaker–levy 9 collided with the giant planet. here we see the site hit by fragment g, from five minutes to five days after impact. several of the dust clouds generated by the collisions became larger than earth. (credit: modification of work by h. hammel, nasa) during the time all the planets have been subject to such impacts, internal forces on the terrestrial planets have buckled and twisted their crusts, built up mountain ranges, erupted as volcanoes, and generally reshaped the surfaces in what we call geological activity.
(the prefix geo means “earth,” so this is a bit of an “earth-chauvinist” term, but it is so widely used that we bow to tradition.) among the terrestrial planets, earth and venus have experienced the most geological activity over their histories, although some of the moons in the outer solar system are also surprisingly active. in contrast, our own moon is a dead world where geological activity ceased billions of years ago. geological activity on a planet is the result of a hot interior. the forces of volcanism and mountain building are driven by heat escaping from the interiors of planets. as we will see, each of the planets was heated at the time of its birth, and this primordial heat initially powered extensive volcanic activity, even on our moon. but, small objects such as the moon soon cooled off. the larger the planet or moon, the longer it retains its internal heat, and therefore the more we expect to see surface evidence of continuing geological activity. the effect is similar to our own experience with a hot baked potato: the larger the potato, the more slowly it cools. if we want a potato to cool quickly, we cut it into small pieces.
for the most part, the history of volcanic activity on the terrestrial planets conforms to the predictions of this simple theory. the moon, the smallest of these objects, is a geologically dead world. although we know less about mercury, it seems likely that this planet, too, ceased most volcanic activity about the same time the moon did. mars represents an intermediate case. it has been much more active than the moon, but less so than earth. earth and venus, the largest terrestrial planets, still have molten interiors even today, some 4.5 billion years after their birth. 7.3 dating planetary surfaces learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: how do we know the age of the surfaces we see on planets and moons? if a world has a surface (as opposed to being mostly gas and liquid), astronomers have developed some techniques for estimating how long ago that surface solidified. note that the age of these surfaces is not necessarily the age of the planet as a whole.