early people thought that the earth was the center of the universe because it appears that we are not moving and that everything else is revolving around us. this is not the case. the motions of the earth. in an airplane, travelling at 550 miles per hour at 35,000 feet in the air, if there is no turbulence, and if the window shades are closed, we would feel the same motion that we would feel sitting on the ground at the gate. but on take-off and landing, we feel the changes in velocity (acceleration and deceleration). there are many motions for which people on the earth experience no accelerations or decelerations, which include the following: • earth’s rotation. every 24 hours people on the earth rotate around the earth’s axis. • earth’s revolution. once a year the earth completely revolves around the sun. • precession. every 26,000 years the earth’s pole rotates around its center of precession. the angular radius of this precession is roughly 23.5 degrees. this is the same type of motion that you see on a top as it wobbles as it is slowing down.
figure 20: precession figure 21: nutation precession – each turn takes 26,000 years [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page33_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page33_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 34 • nutation. there is also a small change in the axial tilt of the earth from year to year. this is called nutation. the principal sources of nutation are the sun and the moon. the term having the largest effect has a period of 6798 days and is caused by the moon. • galactic rotation. the sun is orbiting the center of the milky way galaxy. one orbital revolution takes roughly 250 million earth years. • the sun’s orbital oscillations. as the sun orbits the center of the milky way galaxy there is also an up and down motion. this oscillation has a period of about 35 million years. • galactic attraction. but even galaxies are in motion relative to one another. the andromeda galaxy is approaching the milky way galaxy at a speed of roughly 250,000 miles per hour.
since there is no absolute frame of reference, this means that to creatures in the andromeda galaxy, we are approaching them at 250,000 mph. • location on earth. an observers latitude affects the times of sunrise and sunset. on the earth’s equator the lengths of days and nights change slightly during the year, but at the north and south poles, the day-night cycle becomes quite extreme due to the tilt of the earth and its orbit around the sun. there are many days when the sun does not set. • and there are many more… these are some of the many motions that we are experience living on the earth. figure 22: the sun’s orbit figure 23: the sun’s orbital oscillations [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page34_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page34_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 35 component 9 – motions of the earth humans measure the passage of time. we measure based on the motions of the earth, the sun, and the moon. motions discussed in component 9 have a direct effect on time measurements on earth.
sidereal time as we discuss different time measurements, there are often two different values depending on which bodies are used to determine the cycle. one of the terms is called sidereal. these terms are based on the positions of the relatively fixed locations of distant stars. an easy way to remember this is the real in sidereal. since the distant stars don’t appear to move much in our lifetime, their locations are essentially fixed in space: these are the real coordinates. the other term used relates to the specific bodies that are involved: tropical year, synodic month, and solar day. years the earth is orbiting the sun. due to our axial tilt, there is a point each year when the sun appears as far above the equator as it gets. if we measure the time from one of these points to the next, we measure a tropical year. this is the time required for the earth to experience the four seasons. but due to the earth’s precession, we are slowly changing our orientation towards the stars. the sidereal year is the time it takes to return to the point where the stars are in the same location in the sky, about one year later.