detailed recent studies of the orbits of the planets and asteroids, however, suggest that there were more violent events soon afterward, perhaps involving substantial changes in the orbits of jupiter and saturn. these two giant planets control, through their gravity, the distribution of asteroids. working backward from our present solar system, it appears that orbital changes took place during the first few hundred million years. one consequence may have been scattering of asteroids into the inner solar system, causing the period of “heavy bombardment” recorded in the oldest lunar craters. 14.4 comparison with other planetary systems learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: until the middle 1990s, the practical study of the origin of planets focused on our single known example—the solar system. although there had been a great deal of speculation about planets circling other stars, none had actually been detected. logically enough, in the absence of data, most scientists assumed that our own system was likely to be typical. they were in for a big surprise. discovery of other planetary systems in the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system, we discuss the formation of stars and planets in some detail.
stars like our sun are formed when dense regions in a molecular cloud (made of gas and dust) feel an extra gravitational force and begin to collapse. this is a runaway process: as the cloud collapses, the gravitational force gets stronger, concentrating material into a protostar. roughly half of the time, the protostar will fragment or be gravitationally bound to other protostars, forming a binary or multiple star system—stars that are gravitationally bound and orbit each other. the rest of the time, the protostar collapses in isolation, as was the case for our sun. in all cases, as we saw, conservation of angular momentum results in a spin-up of the collapsing protostar, with surrounding material flattened into a disk. today, this kind of structure can actually be observed. the hubble and james webb space telescopes, as well as powerful new ground-based telescopes, enable astronomers to study directly the nearest of these circumstellar disks in regions of space where stars are being born today, such as the orion nebula (figure 14.14) or the taurus star- forming region. figure 14.14 protoplanetary disk in the orion nebula.
the hubble space telescope imaged this protoplanetary disk in the orion nebula, a region of active star formation, using two different filters. the disk, about 17 times the size of our solar system, is in an edge-on orientation to us, and the newly formed star is shining at the center of the flattened dust cloud. the dark areas indicate absorption, not an absence of material. in the left image we see the light of the nebula and the dark cloud; in the right image, a describe how the observations of protoplanetary disks provides evidence for the existence of other planetary systems explain the two primary methods for detection of exoplanets compare the main characteristics of other planetary systems with the features of the solar system 492 14 • cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page510_img1.jpeg] special filter was used to block the light of the background nebula. you can see gas above and below the disk set to glow by the light of the newborn star hidden by the disk. (credit: modification of work by mark mccaughrean (max-planck-institute for astronomy), c.
robert o’dell (rice university), and nasa) many of the circumstellar disks we have discovered show internal structure. the disks appear to be donut- shaped, with gaps close to the star. such gaps indicate that the gas and dust in the disk have already collapsed to form large planets (figure 14.15). the newly born protoplanets are too small and faint to be seen directly, but the depletion of raw materials in the gaps hints at the presence of something invisible in the inner part of the circumstellar disk—and that something is almost certainly one or more planets. theoretical models of planet formation, like the one seen at right in figure 14.15, have long supported the idea that planets would clear gaps as they form in disks. figure 14.15 protoplanetary disk around hl tau. (a) this image of a protoplanetary disk around hl tau was taken with the atacama large millimeter/submillimeter array (alma), which allows astronomers to construct radio images that rival those taken with visible light. (b) newly formed planets that orbit the central star clear out dust lanes in their paths, just as our theoretical models predict.