measurements of the deuterium abundance in today’s universe show that the total amount of ordinary matter in the universe is only about 5% of the critical density. 29.4 the cosmic microwave background when the universe became cool enough to form neutral hydrogen atoms, the universe became transparent to radiation. scientists have detected the cosmic microwave background (cmb) radiation from this time during the hot, early universe. measurements with the cobe satellite show that the cmb acts like a blackbody with a temperature of 2.73 k. tiny fluctuations in the cmb show us the seeds of large-scale structures in the universe. detailed measurements of these fluctuations show that we live in a critical-density universe and that the critical density is composed of 31% matter, including dark matter, and 69% dark energy. ordinary matter—the kinds of elementary particles we find on earth—make up only about 5% of the critical density. cmb measurements also indicate that the universe is 13.8 billion years old. 29.5 what is the universe really made of? twenty-seven percent of the critical density of the universe is composed of dark matter. to explain so much dark matter, some physics theories predict that additional types of particles should exist.
one type has been given the name of wimps (weakly interacting massive particles), and scientists are now conducting experiments to try to detect them in the laboratory. dark matter plays an essential role in forming galaxies. since, by definition, these particles interact only very weakly (if at all) with radiation, they could have congregated while the universe was still very hot and filled with radiation. they would thus have formed gravitational traps that quickly attracted and concentrated ordinary matter after the universe became transparent, and matter and radiation decoupled. this rapid concentration of matter enabled galaxies to form by the time the universe was only 400–500 million years old. 29.6 the inflationary universe the big bang model does not explain why the cmb has the same temperature in all directions. neither does it explain why the density of the universe is so close to critical density. these observations can be explained if the universe experienced a period of rapid expansion, which scientists call inflation, about 10–35 second after the big bang. new grand unified theories (guts) are being developed to describe physical processes in the universe before and at the time that inflation occurred.
1048 29 • summary access for free at openstax.org 29.7 the anthropic principle recently, many cosmologists have noted that the existence of humans depends on the fact that many properties of the universe—the size of density fluctuations in the early universe, the strength of gravity, the structure of atoms—were just right. the idea that physical laws must be the way they are because otherwise we could not be here to measure them is called the anthropic principle. some scientists speculate that there may be a multiverse of universes, in which ours is just one. for further exploration articles note that the entire january 2021 issue of astronomy magazine was devoted to cosmology. adler, d. “a cold, lonely death.” astronomy (january 2021): 64. a brief introduction to the far future of the universe. croswell, k. “the lithium problem.” sky & telescope (may 2022): 20. predictions of the abundance of lithium from the big bang theory don’t seem to agree with what’s seen in the oldest stars. fernandez, e. “dark energy: a brief history.” sky & telescope (february 2024: 26. how the idea originated and has evolved.
flam, f. “what came before the big bang.” sky & telescope (february 2019): 16. new ideas about multiverses and other solutions to the question of origins. garrison, d. “the first ten seconds.” sky & telescope (september 2021): 22. understanding the physics of the earliest times of the universe. hall, s. “lighting a cosmic fuse.” sky & telescope (june 2019): 14. on using type ia supernovae as distance indicators, and the challenge of whether they are standard candles (bulbs). johnson-groh, m. “dark stars come into the light.” astronomy (october 2018): 18. the possibility that the early universe had dark stars, made in part of dark matter. kruesi, l. “decoding the cosmic microwave background.” astronomy (august 2018): 44. on what it is and what it can tell us. kruesi, l. “how planck has redefined the universe.” astronomy (october 2013): 28. good review of what this space mission has told us about the cmb and the universe. loeb, a.