mean solar time and standard time instead, we can consider the mean solar time, which is based on the average value of the solar day over the course of the year. a mean solar day contains exactly 24 hours and is what we use in our everyday timekeeping. although mean solar time has the advantage of progressing at a uniform rate, it is still inconvenient for practical use because it is determined by the position of the sun. for example, noon occurs when the sun is highest in the sky on the meridian (but not necessarily at the zenith). but because we live on a round earth, the exact time of noon is different as you change your longitude by moving east or west. if mean solar time were strictly observed, people traveling east or west would have to reset their watches continually as the longitude changed, just to read the local mean time correctly. for instance, a commuter traveling from oyster bay on long island to new york city would have to adjust the time on the trip through the east river tunnel because oyster bay time is actually about 1.6 minutes more advanced than that of manhattan.
(imagine an airplane trip in which an obnoxious flight attendant gets on the intercom every minute, saying, “please reset your watch for local mean time.”) until near the end of the nineteenth century, every city and town in the united states kept its own local mean time. with the development of railroads and the telegraph, however, the need for some kind of standardization became evident. in 1883, the united states was divided into four standard time zones (now six, including hawaii and alaska), each with one system of time within that zone. by 1900, most of the world was using the system of 24 standardized global time zones. within each zone, all places keep the same standard time, with the local mean solar time of a standard line of longitude running more or less through the middle of each zone. now travelers reset their watches only when the time change has amounted to a full hour. pacific standard time is 3 hours earlier than eastern standard time, a fact that becomes painfully obvious in california when someone on the east coast forgets and calls you at 5:00 a.m.
globally, almost all countries have adopted one or more standard time zones, although one of the largest nations, india, has settled on a half-zone, being 5.5 hours from greenwich standard. also, china officially uses only one time zone, so all the clocks in that country keep the same time. in tibet, for example, the sun rises while the clocks (which keep beijing time) say it is midmorning already. daylight saving time is simply the local standard time of the place plus 1 hour. it has been adopted for spring and summer use in most states in the united states, as well as in many countries, to prolong the sunlight into evening hours, on the apparent theory that it is easier to change the time by government action than it would be for individuals or businesses to adjust their own schedules to produce the same effect. it does not, of course, “save” any daylight at all—because the amount of sunlight is not determined by what we do with our clocks—and its observance is a point of legislative debate in some states. 4.3 • keeping time 113 the international date line the fact that time is always advancing as you move toward the east presents a problem.
suppose you travel eastward around the world. you pass into a new time zone, on the average, about every 15° of longitude you travel, and each time you dutifully set your watch ahead an hour. by the time you have completed your trip, you have set your watch ahead a full 24 hours and thus gained a day over those who stayed at home. the solution to this dilemma is the international date line, set by international agreement to run approximately along the 180° meridian of longitude. the date line runs down the middle of the pacific ocean, although it jogs a bit in a few places to avoid cutting through groups of islands and through alaska (figure 4.11). by convention, at the date line, the date of the calendar is changed by one day. crossing the date line from west to east, thus advancing your time, you compensate by decreasing the date; crossing from east to west, you increase the date by one day. to maintain our planet on a rational system of timekeeping, we simply must accept that the date will differ in different cities at the same time.