which is larger? which is redder? 27. use the data in appendix i to plot an h–r diagram for this sample of nearby stars. how does this plot differ from the one for the brightest stars in exercise 18.25? why? 28. if a visual binary system were to have two equal-mass stars, how would they be located relative to the center of the mass of the system? what would you observe as you watched these stars as they orbited the 632 18 • exercises access for free at openstax.org center of mass, assuming very circular orbits, and assuming the orbit was face on to your view? 29. two stars are in a visual binary star system that we see face on. one star is very massive whereas the other is much less massive. assuming circular orbits, describe their relative orbits in terms of orbit size, period, and orbital velocity. 30. describe the spectra for a spectroscopic binary for a system comprised of an f-type and l-type star. assume that the system is too far away to be able to easily observe the l-type star. 31. figure 18.7 shows the velocity of two stars in a spectroscopic binary system. which star is the most massive?
explain your reasoning. 32. you go out stargazing one night, and someone asks you how far away the brightest stars we see in the sky without a telescope are. what would be a good, general response? (use appendix j for more information.) 33. if you were to compare three stars with the same surface temperature, with one star being a giant, another a supergiant, and the third a main-sequence star, how would their radii compare to one another? 34. are supergiant stars also extremely massive? explain the reasoning behind your answer. 35. consider the following data on four stars: table b star luminosity (in lsun) type 1 100 b, main sequence 2 1/100 b, white dwarf 3 1/100 m, main sequence 4 100 m, giant which star would have the largest radius? which star would have the smallest radius? which star is the most common in our area of the galaxy? which star is the least common? figuring for yourself 36. if two stars are in a binary system with a combined mass of 5.5 solar masses and an orbital period of 12 years, what is the average distance between the two stars?
37. it is possible that stars as much as 200 times the sun’s mass or more exist. what is the luminosity of such a star based upon the mass-luminosity relation? 38. the lowest mass for a true star is 1/12 the mass of the sun. what is the luminosity of such a star based upon the mass-luminosity relationship? 39. spectral types are an indicator of temperature. for the first 10 stars in appendix j, the list of the brightest stars in our skies, estimate their temperatures from their spectral types. use information in the figures and/or tables in this chapter and describe how you made the estimates. 40. we can estimate the masses of most of the stars in appendix j from the mass-luminosity relationship in figure 18.9. however, remember this relationship works only for main sequence stars. determine which of the first 10 stars in appendix j are main sequence stars. use one of the figures in this chapter. make a table of stars’ masses. 18 • exercises 633 41. in diameters of stars, the relative diameters of the two stars in the sirius system were determined. let’s use this value to explore other aspects of this system.
this will be done through several steps, each in its own exercise. assume the temperature of the sun is 5800 k, and the temperature of sirius a, the larger star of the binary, is 10,000 k. the luminosity of sirius a can be found in appendix j, and is given as about 23 times that of the sun. using the values provided, calculate the radius of sirius a relative to that of the sun. 42. now calculate the radius of sirius’ white dwarf companion, sirius b, to the sun. 43. how does this radius of sirius b compare with that of earth? 44. from the previous calculations and the results from diameters of stars, it is possible to calculate the density of sirius b relative to the sun. it is worth noting that the radius of the companion is very similar to that of earth, whereas the mass is very similar to the sun’s. how does the companion’s density compare to that of the sun? recall that density = mass/volume, and the volume of a sphere = (4/3)πr3. how does this density compare with that of water and other materials discussed in this text?