194 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page212_img1.jpeg] the performance of a telescope is determined not only by the size of its mirror but also by its location. earth’s atmosphere, so vital to life, presents challenges for the observational astronomer. in at least four ways, our air imposes limitations on the usefulness of telescopes: 1. the most obvious limitation is weather conditions such as clouds, wind, and rain. at the best sites, the weather is clear as much as 75% of the time. 2. even on a clear night, the atmosphere filters out a certain amount of starlight, especially in the infrared, where the absorption is due primarily to water vapor. astronomers therefore prefer dry sites, generally found at high altitudes. 3. the sky above the telescope should be dark. near cities, the air scatters the glare from lights, producing an illumination that hides the faintest stars and limits the distances that can be probed by telescopes. (astronomers call this effect light pollution.) observatories are best located at least 100 miles from the nearest large city. 4.
finally, the air is often unsteady; light passing through this turbulent air is disturbed, resulting in blurred star images. astronomers call these effects “bad seeing.” when seeing is bad, images of celestial objects are distorted by the constant twisting and bending of light rays by turbulent air. the best observatory sites are therefore high, dark, and dry. the world’s largest telescopes are found in such remote mountain locations as the andes mountains of chile (figure 6.12), the desert peaks of arizona, the canary islands in the atlantic ocean, and maunakea in hawaii, a dormant volcano with an altitude of 13,700 feet (4200 meters). light pollution is a problem not just for professional astronomers but for everyone who wants to enjoy the beauty of the night sky. in addition research is now showing that it can disrupt the life cycle of animals with whom we share the urban and suburban landscape. and the light wasted shining into the sky leads to unnecessary municipal expenses and use of fossil fuels. concerned people have formed an organization, the international dark-sky association, whose website (https://openstax.org/l/30intdsa) is full of good information.
a citizen science project called globe at night (https://openstax.org/l/30glbatnght) allows you to measure the light levels in your community by counting stars and to compare it to others around the world. recently, a new threat to dark skies has emerged. a number of commercial companies are planning and launching large swarms of satellites into low-earth orbit to provide internet access around the world. unfortunately, these satellites reflect sunlight and have already begun to ruin astronomical photographs the world over. see the further exploration section at the end of this chapter for more resources on this topic. if you get interested in this topic and want to do a paper for your astronomy course or another course while you are in college, the dark night skies guide (https://openstax.org/l/30dnsguide) can point you to a variety of resources on the topic. link to learning 6.2 • telescopes today 195 figure 6.12 high and dry site. cerro paranal, a mountain summit 2.7 kilometers above sea level in chile’s atacama desert, is the site of the european southern observatory’s very large telescope.
this photograph shows the four 8-meter telescope buildings on the site and vividly illustrates that astronomers prefer high, dry sites for their instruments. the 4.1-meter visible and infrared survey telescope for astronomy (vista) can be seen in the distance on the next mountain peak. (credit: eso) the resolution of a telescope in addition to gathering as much light as they can, astronomers also want to have the sharpest images possible. resolution refers to the precision of detail present in an image: that is, the smallest features that can be distinguished. astronomers are always eager to make out more detail in the images they study, whether they are following the weather on jupiter or trying to peer into the violent heart of a “cannibal galaxy” that recently ate its neighbor for lunch. one factor that determines how good the resolution will be is the size of the telescope. larger apertures produce sharper images. until very recently, however, visible-light and infrared telescopes on earth’s surface could not produce images as sharp as the theory of light said they should. the problem—as we saw earlier in this chapter—is our planet’s atmosphere, which is turbulent. it contains many small-scale blobs or cells of gas that range in size from inches to several feet.