(credit: x-ray: nasa/cxc/isdc/l.pavan et al, radio: csiro/atnf/atca optical: 2mass/umass/ipac-caltech/nasa/nsf) touched by a neutron star on december 27, 2004, earth was bathed with a stream of x-ray and gamma-ray radiation from a neutron star known as sgr 1806-20. what made this event so remarkable was that, despite the distance of the source, its tidal wave of radiation had measurable effects on earth’s atmosphere. the apparent brightness of this gamma-ray flare was greater than any historical star explosion. the primary effect of the radiation was on a layer high in earth’s atmosphere called the ionosphere. at night, the ionosphere is normally at a height of about 85 kilometers, but during the day, energy from the sun ionizes more molecules and lowers the boundary of the ionosphere to a height of about 60 kilometers. the pulse of x-ray and gamma-ray radiation produced about the same level of ionization as the daytime sun. it also caused some sensitive satellites above the atmosphere to shut down their electronics.
measurements by telescopes in space indicate that sgr 1806-20 was a special type of fast-spinning neutron star called a magnetar. astronomers robert duncan and christopher thomson gave them this name because their magnetic fields are stronger than that of any other type of astronomical source—in this case, about 800 trillion times stronger than the magnetic field of earth. a magnetar is thought to consist of a superdense core of neutrons surrounded by a rigid crust of atoms about a mile deep with a surface made of iron. the magnetar’s field is so strong that it creates huge stresses inside that can sometimes crack open the hard crust, causing a starquake. the vibrating crust produces an enormous blast of radiation. an astronaut 0.1 light-year from this particular magnetar would have received a fatal does from the blast in less than a second. fortunately, we were far enough away from magnetar sgr 1806-20 to be safe. could a magnetar ever present a real danger to earth? to produce enough energy to disrupt the ozone layer, a magnetar would have to be located within the cloud of comets that surround the solar system, and we know no magnetars are that close.
nevertheless, it is a fascinating discovery that events on distant star corpses can have making connections 802 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page820_img1.jpeg] measurable effects on earth. 23.5 the evolution of binary star systems learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the discussion of the life stories of stars presented so far has suffered from a bias—what we might call “single- star chauvinism.” because the human race developed around a star that goes through life alone, we tend to think of most stars in isolation. but as we saw in the stars: a celestial census, it now appears that as many as half of all stars may develop in binary systems—those in which two stars are born in each other’s gravitational embrace and go through life orbiting a common center of mass. for these stars, the presence of a close-by companion can have a profound influence on their evolution. under the right circumstances, stars can exchange material, especially during the stages when one of them swells up into a giant or supergiant, or has a strong wind.
when this happens and the companion stars are sufficiently close, material can flow from one star to another, decreasing the mass of the donor and increasing the mass of the recipient. such mass transfer can be especially dramatic when the recipient is a stellar remnant such as a white dwarf or a neutron star. while the detailed story of how such binary stars evolve is beyond the scope of our book, we do want to mention a few examples of how the stages of evolution described in this chapter may change when there are two stars in a system. white dwarf explosions: the mild kind let’s consider the following system of two stars: one has become a white dwarf and the other is gradually transferring material onto it. as fresh hydrogen from the outer layers of its companion accumulates on the surface of the hot white dwarf, it begins to build up a layer of hydrogen. as more and more hydrogen accumulates and heats up on the surface of the degenerate star, the new layer eventually reaches a temperature that causes fusion to begin in a sudden, explosive way, blasting much of the new material away. in this way, the white dwarf quickly (but only briefly) becomes quite bright, hundreds or thousands of times its previous luminosity.