we find that, on average, 90% of all stars are located on the main sequence of the h–r diagram. if we can identify some activity or life stage with the main sequence, then it follows that stars must spend 90% of their lives in that activity or life stage. understanding the main sequence in the sun: a nuclear powerhouse, we discussed the sun as a representative star. we saw that what stars such as the sun “do for a living” is to convert protons into helium deep in their interiors via the process of nuclear fusion, thus producing energy. the fusion of protons to helium is an excellent, long-lasting source of energy for a star because the bulk of every star consists of hydrogen atoms, whose nuclei are protons. our computer models of how stars evolve over time show us that a typical star will spend about 90% of its life fusing the abundant hydrogen in its core into helium. this then is a good explanation of why 90% of all stars are found on the main sequence in the h–r diagram. but if all the stars on the main sequence are doing the same thing (fusing hydrogen), why are they distributed along a sequence of points?
that is, why do they differ in luminosity and surface temperature (which is what we are plotting on the h–r diagram)? to help us understand how main-sequence stars differ, we can use one of the most important results from our studies of model stars. astrophysicists have been able to show that the structure of stars that are in equilibrium and derive all their energy from nuclear fusion is completely and uniquely determined by just two quantities: the total mass and the composition of the star. this fact provides an interpretation of many features of the h–r diagram. imagine a cluster of stars forming from a cloud of interstellar “raw material” whose chemical composition is similar to the sun’s. (we’ll describe this process in more detail in the birth of stars and discovery of planets outside the solar system, but for now, the details will not concern us.) in such a cloud, all the clumps of gas and dust that become stars begin with the same chemical composition and differ from one another only in mass. now suppose that we compute a model of each of these stars for the time at which it becomes stable and derives its energy from nuclear reactions, but before it has time to alter its composition appreciably as a result of these reactions.
the models calculated for these stars allow us to determine their luminosities, temperatures, and sizes. if we plot the results from the models—one point for each model star—on the h–r diagram, we get something that looks just like the main sequence we saw for real stars. and here is what we find when we do this. the model stars with the largest masses are the hottest and most luminous, and they are located at the upper left of the diagram. the least-massive model stars are the coolest and least luminous, and they are placed at the lower right of the plot. the other model stars all lie along a line running diagonally across the diagram. in other words, the main sequence turns out to be a sequence of stellar masses. this makes sense if you think about it. the most massive stars have the most gravity and can thus compress their centers to the greatest degree. this means they are the hottest inside and the best at generating energy from nuclear reactions deep within. as a result, they shine with the greatest luminosity and have the hottest surface temperatures. the stars with lowest mass, in turn, are the coolest inside and least effective in generating energy.
thus, they are the least luminous and wind up being the coolest on the surface. our sun 624 18 • the stars: a celestial census access for free at openstax.org lies somewhere in the middle of these extremes (as you can see in figure 18.14). the characteristics of representative main-sequence stars (excluding brown dwarfs, which are not true stars) are listed in table 18.3. characteristics of main-sequence stars spectral type mass (sun = 1) luminosity (sun = 1) temperature radius (sun = 1) o5 40 40,000 k 18 b0 16 28,000 k 7 a0 3.3 55 10,000 k 2.5 f0 1.7 5 7500 k 1.4 g0 1.1 1.4 6000 k 1.1 k0 0.8 0.35 5000 k 0.8 m0 0.4 0.05 3500 k 0.6 table 18.3 note that we’ve seen this 90% figure come up before.