then the light beam must arrive directly opposite the point from which it started in the ship. the light, like the ball thrown back and forth, must fall with the ship that is in orbit around earth (see figure 24.6). this would make its path curve downward, like the path of the ball, and thus the light would hit the front wall exactly opposite the spot from which it came. thinking this over, you might well conclude that it doesn’t seem like such a big problem: why can’t light fall the way balls do? but, as discussed in radiation and spectra, light is profoundly different from balls. balls have mass, while light does not. here is where einstein’s intuition and genius allowed him to make a profound leap. he gave physical meaning to the strange result of our thought experiment. einstein suggested that the light curves down to meet the front of the shuttle because earth’s gravity actually bends the fabric of space and time. this radical idea—which we will explain next—keeps the behavior of light the same in both empty space and free fall, but it changes some of our most basic and cherished ideas about space and time.
the reason we take einstein’s suggestion seriously is that, as we will see, experiments now clearly show his intuitive leap was correct. 24.2 spacetime and gravity learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: is light actually bent from its straight-line path by the mass of earth? how can light, which has no mass, be affected by gravity? einstein preferred to think that it is space and time that are affected by the presence of a large mass; light beams, and everything else that travels through space and time, then find their paths affected. light always follows the shortest path—but that path may not always be straight. this idea is true for human travel on the curved surface of planet earth, as well. say you want to fly from chicago to rome. since an airplane can’t go through the solid body of the earth, the shortest distance is not a straight line but the arc of a great circle. linkages: mass, space, and time to show what einstein’s insight really means, let’s first consider how we locate an event in space and time.
for describe einstein’s view of gravity as the warping of spacetime in the presence of massive objects understand that newton’s concept of the gravitational force between two massive objects and einstein’s concept of warped spacetime are different explanations for the same observed accelerations of one massive object in the presence of another massive object 24.2 • spacetime and gravity 831 [image: astronomy_openstax_page849_img1.jpeg] example, imagine you have to describe to worried school officials the fire that broke out in your room when your roommate tried cooking shish kebabs in the fireplace. you explain that your dorm is at 6400 college avenue, a street that runs in the left-right direction on a map of your town; you are on the fifth floor, which tells where you are in the up-down direction; and you are the sixth room back from the elevator, which tells where you are in the forward-backward direction. then you explain that the fire broke out at 6:23 p.m. (but was soon brought under control), which specifies the event in time. any event in the universe, whether nearby or far away, can be pinpointed using the three dimensions of space and the one dimension of time.
newton considered space and time to be completely independent, and that continued to be the accepted view until the beginning of the twentieth century. but einstein showed that there is an intimate connection between space and time, and that only by considering the two together—in what we call spacetime—can we build up a correct picture of the physical world. we examine spacetime a bit more closely in the next subsection. the gist of einstein’s general theory is that the presence of matter curves or warps the fabric of spacetime. this curving of spacetime is identified with gravity. when something else—a beam of light, an electron, or the starship enterprise—enters such a region of distorted spacetime, its path will be different from what it would have been in the absence of the matter. as american physicist john wheeler summarized it: “matter tells spacetime how to curve; spacetime tells matter how to move.” the amount of distortion in spacetime depends on the mass of material that is involved and on how concentrated and compact it is. terrestrial objects, such as the book you are reading, have far too little mass to introduce any significant distortion. newton’s view of gravity is just fine for building bridges, skyscrapers, or amusement park rides.