this means that anyone can look up the figure 71: lines of declination figure 72: lines of right ascension [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page63_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page63_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 64 coordinates on a star chart and find the object with their telescope, and the coordinates are all the information they need from you to find it. however, the sun, the moon, the planets, asteroids, comets and transient events (such as meteors and man-made satellites) move independently of the background stars. their location in declination and right ascension change rather quickly, over years, days, minutes, and sometimes even seconds. in these cases someone needs to know the right ascension, declination, date and time, and sometimes your latitude and longitude as well. which to use? the accuracy of the altitude and azimuth coordinate system and the right ascension and declination coordinate system is the same. it depends on how accurately you measure the angles. using your hands is not very accurate, but using a calibrated telescope mount can be very accurate.
the coordinate system to use depends on what you are observing and who you are communicating those coordinates to. for objects beyond the solar system when you are communicating to other observers who are not standing beside you, then right ascension and declination are best. they provide a coordinate system that is independent of you, the observer. but these coordinates are tough to generate if you are describing the location of a new object. but when you are describing the location of a new object, or an object that is within the solar system, then these objects may move relative to the background stars. this means that their right ascension and declination may not be known, or it may be changing. right ascension and declination are extensions of earthly coordinates into space and are the celestial coordinates the accuracy of either coordinate system is only a function of how accurately you measure the coordinates for the object. if you use your hands, they will be less accurate than if you used a well calibrated piece of equipment. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 65 when you are talking to another observer who is standing right next to you, the easiest system to use is altitude and azimuth. this lets the other observer see where you are looking at that time.
the difficulty with communicating an altitude and azimuth is that for a distant observer to recreate the situation you are seeing, you must also communicate the date, time, your latitude, and your longitude. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 66 component 18 – the nature of light we can relate to light. it is the thing that lets us see our surroundings. but there are many interesting characteristics of light. light as waves diffraction. to see light behave as a wave, you only need to shine it through a small hole in a wall. the image that the light makes on a screen beyond the wall is not a well-defined spot. instead, there are diffraction rings. figure 73 shows this effect from light shown through a pinhole. this is the same effect you see in a telescope when the objects are far out of focus. figure 74 shows the apparatus to produce diffraction rings. the red lines represent the peaks of the light waves. the white between the red lines represents the valleys of the light waves. refraction. as light passes from one medium to another the path followed by those waves is bent. for example, passing from air into the glass of a lens will cause the light waves to bend (see figure 75).
this is the principle involved in lenses used in refracting telescopes and binoculars. different frequencies of light will bend different amounts. red light will bend less than blue light as it passes through a lens. figure 73: diffraction rings figure 74: diffraction ring generation figure 75: refraction photo by ajizai [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page66_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page66_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 67 reflection. light that comes into contact with a reflective surface will bounce off the surface at an angle equal to the angle at which it arrived. this is the principle involved in mirrors in reflecting telescopes. it is also the principle involved in the prisms in binoculars (see figure 76). figure 77 shows a wave and labels the significant parts. these parts include: • crest – the top of each wave. • trough – the bottom of each wave. • wavelength (λ) – the distance between any two crests or troughs. it is usually shown in nm (nanometers).