[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page458_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 459 figure 499: solar radiation spectrum public domain according to adams, he had worked out a position for the new planet by the middle of 1845. but a series of miscommunications and missed appointments with the astronomer royal, george biddell airy, delayed an actual search. but by the summer of 1846, airy had heard about leverrier’s efforts and was struck by similarities he found in adams’ work. desiring that england obtain the glory of discovery, airy induced james challis at the cambridge university observatory to begin an immediate search. after galle’s announcement it was later determined that challis had actually observed the new planet on august 8th and august 12th, but didn’t realize it because he had out-of-date star charts. adams always accorded the right of discovery to leverrier and galle, and apparently held no ill will toward challis or airy. he would go on to do important work on the subtleties of the moon’s orbit.
as for galle, he turned down the appointment at konigsberg due to academic politics; he later became director of the observatory at breslau. and leverrier continued his work on celestial mechanics; in 1859 he discovered an anomaly in the orbit of mercury that could not be accounted for by using newtonian mechanics. this anomaly would go unexplained until 1915, when it was successfully explained by albert einstein. astronomical spectroscopy: a powerful new tool gustav robert kirchhoff (1828-1887) was born in konigsberg, the son of a lawyer, who sent him to the university there. kirchhoff was not an astronomer, but his radiation laws would revolutionize the ability of astronomers to analyze the light they captured in telescopes. with his colleague, chemist robert bunsen at the university of heidelberg, germany, they established the theory of black body radiation in 1860. kirchhoff analyzed a hypothetical object that would be a perfect radiator and absorber of heat, which he called a black body. this led him to the radiation law: λmax = 2,897,820 / °k, where λmax is measured in nm (10-9 meter).
when plotted as shown in the diagram, the temperature of a heated object could be determined from the peak intensity of its blackbody curve. this led them to three radiation laws associated with the spectra of heated materials: [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page459_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 460 figure 501: spectra figure 500: solar spectrum with fraunhofer lines drawing by kurgus 1. an incandescent solid or a gas under pressure will produce a continuous spectrum 2. an incandescent gas under low pressure will produce an emission-line spectrum. 3. a continuous spectrum viewed through a low-density gas at low temperature will produce an absorption-line spectrum. from the spectra obtained for various substances, kirchhoff and bunsen were able to identify different chemical elements, a powerful analytical tool for chemists, but also for astronomers. one of the first applications for this new tool was an analysis of the sun’s spectrum. due to various effects arising from sunlight having to penetrate the layers of the earth’s atmosphere, the solar spectrum is somewhat different from a perfect blackbody.
this diagram shows the results of modern measurements that take place at different levels of the atmosphere in order to show how the sun conforms to the typical blackbody curve. since the sun’s outer layers are a gas at low pressure, dark absorption lines are recorded by a spectroscope. so now it was possible to determine the chemical composition of the sun and other objects, as well as their temperatures. among a rapidly growing number of spectroscopists was anders jonas ångström (1814-1874), a graduate of uppsala university and later keeper of the uppsala university observatory in uppsala, sweden. he was of the first to use an etched glass grating rather than a prism to obtain spectra. this new technique allowed him to measure over 1000 absorption lines in the sun’s spectrum, which he published in 1868. his measurements all used units of 10-10m, which are now known as ångström units (å), still widely used today. through spectroscopy, american astronomers finally stepped on to the world stage.