explain how this idea can be used to date the formation of the martian highlands, the martian basins, and the tharsis volcanoes. how certain are the ages derived for these features (in other words, how do we check the ages we derive from this method)? 20. is it likely that life ever existed on either venus or mars? justify your answer in each case. 21. suppose that, decades from now, nasa is considering sending astronauts to mars and venus. in each case, describe what kind of protective gear they would have to carry, and what their chances for survival would be if their spacesuits ruptured. 22. we believe that venus, earth, and mars all started with a significant supply of water. explain where that water is now for each planet. 23. one source of information about mars has been the analysis of meteorites from mars. since no samples from mars have ever been returned to earth from any of the missions we sent there, how do we know these meteorites are from mars? what information have they revealed about mars? 24. the runaway greenhouse effect and its inverse, the runaway refrigerator effect, have led to harsh, uninhabitable conditions on venus and mars.
does the greenhouse effect always cause climate changes leading to loss of water and life? give a reason for your answer. 25. in what way is the high surface temperature of venus relevant to concerns about global warming on earth today? 26. what is a dust devil? would you expect to feel more of a breeze from a dust devil on mars or on earth? explain. 27. near the martian equator, temperatures at the same spot can vary from an average of –135 °c at night to an average of 30 °c during the day. how can you explain such a wide difference in temperature compared 362 10 • exercises access for free at openstax.org to that on earth? figuring for yourself 28. estimate the amount of water there could be in a global (planet-wide) region of subsurface permafrost on mars (do the calculations for two permafrost thicknesses, 1 and 10 km, and a concentration of ice in the permafrost of 10% by volume). compare the two results you get with the amount of water in earth’s oceans calculated in example 10.1. 29. at its nearest, venus comes within about 41 million km of earth.
how distant is it at its farthest? 30. if you weigh 150 lbs. on the surface of earth, how much would you weigh on venus? on mars? 31. calculate the relative land area—that is, the amount of the surface not covered by liquids—of earth, the moon, venus, and mars. (assume that 70% of earth is covered with water.) 32. the closest approach distance between mars and earth is about 56 million km. assume you can travel in a spaceship at 58,000 km/h, which is the speed achieved by the new horizons space probe that went to pluto and is the fastest speed so far of any space vehicle launched from earth. how long would it take to get to mars at the time of closest approach? 10 • exercises 363 364 10 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 11.1 giant planets.
the four giant planets in our solar system all have hydrogen atmospheres, but the warm gas giants, jupiter and saturn, have tan, beige, red, and white clouds that are thought to be composed of ammonia ice particles with various colorants called “chromophores.” the blue-tinted ice giants, uranus and neptune, are much colder and covered in methane ice clouds. (credit: modification of work by lunar and planetary institute, nasa) chapter outline 11.1 exploring the outer planets 11.2 the giant planets 11.3 atmospheres of the giant planets thinking ahead what do we learn about the earth by studying the planets? humility. —andrew ingersoll discussing the results of the voyager mission in 1986. beyond mars and the asteroid belt, we encounter a new region of the solar system: the realm of the giants. temperatures here are lower, permitting water and other volatiles to condense as ice. the planets are much larger, distances between them are much greater, and each giant world is accompanied by an extensive system of moons and rings. from many perspectives, the outer solar system is where the action is, and the giant planets are the most important members of the sun’s family.