solid objects would be ripped from the surface, a ball dropped from a great height would not strike the ground directly below it, and so forth. but a moving person is not necessarily aware of that motion. we have all experienced seeing an adjacent train, bus, or ship appear to move, only to discover that it is we who are moving. copernicus argued that the apparent motion of the sun about earth during the course of a year could be represented equally well by a motion of earth about the sun. he also reasoned that the apparent rotation of the celestial sphere could be explained by assuming that earth rotates while the celestial sphere is stationary. to the objection that if earth rotated about an axis it would fly into pieces, copernicus answered that if such motion would tear earth apart, the still faster motion of the much larger celestial sphere required by the geocentric hypothesis would be even more devastating. the heliocentric model the most important idea in copernicus’ de revolutionibus is that earth is one of six (then-known) planets that revolve about the sun. using this concept, he was able to work out the correct general picture of the solar system.
he placed the planets, starting nearest the sun, in the correct order: mercury, venus, earth, mars, jupiter, and saturn. further, he deduced that the nearer a planet is to the sun, the greater its orbital speed. 2.4 • the birth of modern astronomy 55 [image: astronomy_openstax_page73_img1.jpeg] with his theory, he was able to explain the complex retrograde motions of the planets without epicycles and to work out a roughly correct scale for the solar system. copernicus could not prove that earth revolves about the sun. in fact, with some adjustments, the old ptolemaic system could have accounted, as well, for the motions of the planets in the sky. but copernicus pointed out that the ptolemaic cosmology was clumsy and lacking the beauty and symmetry of its successor. in copernicus’ time, in fact, few people thought there were ways to prove whether the heliocentric or the older geocentric system was correct. a long philosophical tradition, going back to the greeks and defended by the catholic church, held that pure human thought combined with divine revelation represented the path to truth.
nature, as revealed by our senses, was suspect. for example, aristotle had reasoned that heavier objects (having more of the quality that made them heavy) must fall to earth faster than lighter ones. this is absolutely incorrect, as any simple experiment dropping two balls of different weights shows. however, in copernicus’ day, experiments did not carry much weight (if you will pardon the expression); aristotle’s reasoning was more convincing. in this environment, there was little motivation to carry out observations or experiments to distinguish between competing cosmological theories (or anything else). it should not surprise us, therefore, that the heliocentric idea was debated for more than half a century without any tests being applied to determine its validity. (in fact, in the north american colonies, the older geocentric system was still taught at harvard university in the first years after it was founded in 1636.) contrast this with the situation today, when scientists rush to test each new hypothesis and do not accept any ideas until the results are in.
for example, when two researchers at the university of utah announced in 1989 that they had discovered a way to achieve nuclear fusion (the process that powers the stars) at room temperature, other scientists at more than 25 laboratories around the united states attempted to duplicate “cold fusion” within a few weeks—without success, as it turned out. the cold fusion theory soon went down in flames. how would we look at copernicus’ model today? when a new hypothesis or theory is proposed in science, it must first be checked for consistency with what is already known. copernicus’ heliocentric idea passes this test, for it allows planetary positions to be calculated at least as well as does the geocentric theory. the next step is to determine which predictions the new hypothesis makes that differ from those of competing ideas. in the case of copernicus, one example is the prediction that, if venus circles the sun, the planet should go through the full range of phases just as the moon does, whereas if it circles earth, it should not (figure 2.18). also, we should not be able to see the full phase of venus from earth because the sun would then be between venus and earth.