but the moon does not remain in this phase long because it moves eastward each day in its monthly path around us. since it takes about 30 days to orbit earth and there are 360° in a circle, the moon will move about 12° in the sky each day (or about 24 times its own diameter). a day or two after the new phase, the thin crescent first appears, as we begin to see a small part of the moon’s illuminated hemisphere. it has moved into a position where it now reflects a little sunlight toward us along one side. the bright crescent increases in size on successive days as the moon moves farther and farther around the sky away from the direction of the sun (position b). because the moon is moving eastward away from the sun, it rises later and later each day (like a student during summer vacation). after about one week, the moon is one-quarter of the way around its orbit (position c) and so we say it is at the first quarter phase. half of the moon’s illuminated side is visible to earth observers. because of its eastward motion, the moon now lags about one-quarter of the day behind the sun, rising around noon and setting around midnight.
during the week after the first quarter phase, we see more and more of the moon’s illuminated hemisphere (position d), a phase that is called waxing (or growing) gibbous (from the latin gibbus, meaning hump). eventually, the moon arrives at position e in our figure, where it and the sun are opposite each other in the sky. the side of the moon turned toward the sun is also turned toward earth, and we have the full phase. when the moon is full, it is opposite the sun in the sky. the moon does the opposite of what the sun does, rising at sunset and setting at sunrise. note what that means in practice: the completely illuminated (and thus very noticeable) moon rises just as it gets dark, remains in the sky all night long, and sets as the sun’s first rays are seen at dawn. its illumination throughout the night helps lovers on a romantic stroll and students finding their way back to their dorms after a long night in the library or an off-campus party. 118 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page136_img1.jpeg] and when is the full moon highest in the sky and most noticeable?
at midnight, a time made famous in generations of horror novels and films. (note how the behavior of a vampire like dracula parallels the behavior of the full moon: dracula rises at sunset, does his worst mischief at midnight, and must be back down in his coffin by sunrise. the old legends were a way of personifying the behavior of the moon, which was a much more dramatic part of people’s lives in the days before electric lights and television.) folklore has it that more crazy behavior is seen during the time of the full moon (the moon even gives a name to crazy behavior—“lunacy”). but, in fact, statistical tests of this “hypothesis” involving thousands of records from hospital emergency rooms and police files do not reveal any correlation of human behavior with the phases of the moon. for example, homicides occur at the same rate during the new moon or the crescent moon as during the full moon. most investigators believe that the real story is not that more crazy behavior happens on nights with a full moon, but rather that we are more likely to notice or remember such behavior with the aid of a bright celestial light that is up all night long.
during the two weeks following the full moon, the moon goes through the same phases again in reverse order (points f, g, and h in figure 4.14), returning to new phase after about 29.5 days. about a week after the full moon, for example, the moon is at third quarter, meaning that it is three-quarters of the way around (not that it is three-quarters illuminated—in fact, half of the visible side of the moon is again dark). at this phase, the moon is now rising around midnight and setting around noon. note that there is one thing quite misleading about figure 4.14. if you look at the moon in position e, although it is full in theory, it appears as if its illumination would in fact be blocked by a big fat earth, and hence we would not see anything on the moon except earth’s shadow. in reality, the moon is nowhere near as close to earth (nor is its path so identical with the sun’s in the sky) as this diagram (and the diagrams in most textbooks) might lead you to believe. the moon is actually 30 earth-diameters away from us; science and the universe: a brief tour contains a diagram that shows the two objects to scale.