clusters and superclusters are found in filamentary structures that are huge but fill only a small fraction of space. most of space consists of large voids between superclusters, with nearly all galaxies confined to less than 10% of the total volume. 28.4 the challenge of dark matter stars move much faster in their orbits around the centers of galaxies, and galaxies around centers of galaxy clusters, than they should according to the gravity of all the luminous matter (stars, gas, and dust) astronomers can detect. this discrepancy implies that galaxies and galaxy clusters are dominated by dark matter rather than normal luminous matter. gravitational lensing and x-ray radiation from massive galaxy clusters confirm the presence of dark matter. galaxies and clusters of galaxies contain about 10 times more dark matter than luminous matter. while some of the dark matter may be made up of ordinary matter (protons, neutrons, and electrons), perhaps in the form of very faint stars or black holes, most of it probably consists of some totally new type of particle not yet detected on earth.
observations of gravitational lensing effects on distant objects have been used to look in the outer region of our galaxy for any dark matter in the form of compact, dim stars or star remnants, but not enough such objects have been found to account for all the dark matter. 28.5 the formation and evolution of galaxies and structure in the universe initially, luminous and dark matter in the universe was distributed almost—but not quite—uniformly. the challenge for galaxy formation theories is to show how this “not quite” smooth distribution of matter developed the structures—galaxies and galaxy clusters—that we see today. it is likely that the filamentary distribution of galaxies and voids was built in near the beginning, before stars and galaxies began to form. the first condensations of matter were about the mass of a large star cluster or a small galaxy. these smaller structures then merged over cosmic time to form large galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and superclusters of galaxies. superclusters today are still gathering up more galaxies, gas, and dark matter. and spiral galaxies like the milky way are still acquiring material by capturing small galaxies near them. for further exploration articles andrews, b.
“what are galaxies trying to tell us?” astronomy (february 2011): 24. introduction to our understanding of the shapes and evolution of different types of galaxies. barger, a. “the midlife crisis of the cosmos.” scientific american (january 2005): 46. on how our time differs from the early universe in terms of what galaxies are doing, and what role supermassive black holes play. berman, b. “the missing universe.” astronomy (april 2014): 24. brief review of dark matter, what it could be, and modified theories of gravity that can also explain it. faber, s., et al. “staring back to cosmic dawn.” sky & telescope (june 2014): 18. program to see the most distant and earliest galaxies with the hubble. geller, m., & huchra, j. “mapping the universe.” sky & telescope (august 1991): 134. on their project mapping the location of galaxies in three dimensions. hooper, d. “dark matter in the discovery age.” sky & telescope (january 2013): 26. on experiments looking for the nature of dark matter. james, c.
r. “the hubble deep field: the picture worth a trillion stars.” astronomy (november 2015): 44. 998 28 • for further exploration access for free at openstax.org detailed history and results, plus the hubble ultra-deep field. kaufmann, g., & van den bosch, f. “the life cycle of galaxies.” scientific american (june 2002): 46. on the evolution of galaxies and how the different shapes of galaxies develop. knapp, g. “mining the heavens: the sloan digital sky survey.” sky & telescope (august 1997): 40. kron, r., & butler, s. “stars and strips forever.” astronomy (february 1999): 48. on the sloan digital survey. kruesi, l. “what do we really know about dark matter?” astronomy (november 2009): 28. focuses on what dark matter could be and experiments to find out. larson, r., & bromm, v. “the first stars in the universe.” scientific american (december 2001): 64. on the dark ages and the birth of the first stars.