since the universe is the same all over (at least on large scales), we only need to measure how much matter exists in a (large) representative sample of it. this is similar to the way a representative survey of a few thousand people can tell us whom the millions of residents of the us prefer for president. there are several methods by which we can try to determine the average density of matter in space. one way is to count all the galaxies out to a given distance and use estimates of their masses, including dark matter, to calculate the average density. such estimates indicate a density of about 1 to kg/m3 (10 to 20% of critical), which by itself is too small to stop the expansion. a lot of the dark matter lies outside the boundaries of galaxies, so this inventory is not yet complete. but even if we add an estimate of the dark matter outside galaxies, our total won’t rise beyond about 30% of the critical density. we’ll pin these numbers down more precisely later in this chapter, where we will also include the effects of dark energy. in any case, even if we ignore dark energy, the evidence is that the universe will continue to expand forever.
the discovery of dark energy that is causing the rate of expansion to speed up only strengthens this conclusion. things definitely do not look good for fans of the closed universe (big crunch) model. what might the universe be like in the distant future? some say the world will end in fire, some say in ice. from what i’ve tasted of desire making connections 1018 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org i hold with those who favor fire. —from the poem “fire and ice” by robert frost (1923) given the destructive power of impacting asteroids, expanding red giants, and nearby supernovae, our species may not be around in the remote future. nevertheless, you might enjoy speculating about what it would be like to live in a much, much older universe. the observed acceleration makes it likely that we will have continued expansion into the indefinite future. if the universe expands forever (r increases without limit), the clusters of galaxies will spread ever farther apart with time. as eons pass, the universe will get thinner, colder, and darker. within each galaxy, stars will continue to go through their lives, eventually becoming white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes.
low-mass stars might take a long time to finish their evolution, but in this model, we would literally have all the time in the world. ultimately, even the white dwarfs will cool down to be black dwarfs, any neutron stars that reveal themselves as pulsars will slowly stop spinning, and black holes with accretion disks will one day complete their “meals.” the remains of stars will all be dark and difficult to observe. this means that the light that now reveals galaxies to us will eventually go out. even if a small pocket of raw material were left in one unsung corner of a galaxy, ready to be turned into a fresh cluster of stars, we will only have to wait until the time that their evolution is also complete. and time is one thing this model of the universe has plenty of. there will surely come a time when all the stars are out, galaxies are as dark as space, and no source of heat remains to help living things survive. then the lifeless galaxies will just continue to move apart in their lightless realm. if this view of the future seems discouraging (from a human perspective), keep in mind that we fundamentally do not understand why the expansion rate is currently accelerating.
thus, our speculations about the future are just that: speculations. you might take heart in the knowledge that science is always a progress report. the most advanced ideas about the universe from a hundred years ago now strike us as rather primitive. it may well be that our best models of today will in a hundred or a thousand years also seem rather simplistic and that there are other factors determining the ultimate fate of the universe of which we are still completely unaware. ages of distant galaxies in the chapter on galaxies, we discussed how we can use hubble’s law to measure the distance to a galaxy. but that simple method only works with galaxies that are not too far away. once we get to large distances, we are looking so far into the past that we must take into account changes in the rate of the expansion of the universe. since we cannot measure these changes directly, we must assume one of the models of the universe to be able to convert large redshifts into distances. this is why astronomers squirm when reporters and students ask them exactly how far away some newly discovered distant quasar or galaxy is.