comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system 13 [image: astronomy_openstax_page453_img1.jpeg] 13.1 asteroids learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the asteroids are mostly found in the broad space between mars and jupiter, a region of the solar system called the asteroid belt. asteroids are too small to be seen without a telescope; the first of them was not discovered until the beginning of the nineteenth century. discovery and orbits of the asteroids in the late 1700s, many astronomers were hunting for an additional planet they thought should exist in the gap between the orbits of mars and jupiter. the sicilian astronomer giovanni piazzi thought he had found this missing planet in 1801, when he discovered the first asteroid (or as it was later called, “minor planet”) orbiting at 2.8 au from the sun. his discovery, which he named ceres, was quickly followed by the detection of three other little planets in similar orbits. clearly, there was not a single missing planet between mars and jupiter but rather a whole group of objects, each much smaller than our moon. (an analogous discovery history has played out in slow motion in the outer solar system.
pluto was discovered beyond neptune in 1930 and was initially called a planet, but early in the twenty-first century, several other similar objects were found. we now call all of them dwarf planets.) by 1890, more than 300 of these minor planets or asteroids had been discovered by sharp-eyed observers. in that year, max wolf at heidelberg introduced astronomical photography to the search for asteroids, greatly accelerating the discovery of these dim objects. in the twenty-first century, searchers use computer-driven electronic cameras, another leap in technology. currently many asteroid searches are made with cameras in space. more than a million asteroids now have well-determined orbits. asteroids are given a number (corresponding to the order of discovery) and sometimes also a name. originally, the names of asteroids were chosen from goddesses in greek and roman mythology. after exhausting these and other female names (including, later, those of spouses, friends, flowers, cities, and others), astronomers turned to the names of colleagues (and other people of distinction) whom they wished to honor.
for example, asteroids 2410, 4859, and 68448 are named morrison, fraknoi, and sidneywolff, for the three senior authors of this textbook. the largest asteroid is ceres (numbered 1), with a diameter just less than 1000 kilometers. as we saw, ceres was considered a planet when it was discovered but later was called an asteroid (the first of many.) now, it has again been reclassified and is considered one of the dwarf planets, like pluto (see the chapter on moons, rings and pluto). we still find it convenient, however, to discuss ceres as the largest of the asteroids. two other asteroids, pallas and vesta, have diameters of about 500 kilometers, and about 15 more are larger than 250 kilometers (see table 13.1). the number of asteroids increases rapidly with decreasing size; there are about 100 times more objects 10 kilometers across than there are 100 kilometers across. the minor planet center (https://openstax.org/l/30minplancen) is a worldwide repository of data on asteroids.
visit it online to find out about the latest discoveries related to the small bodies in our solar system. (note that some of the material on this site is technical; it’s best to click on the menu tab for the outline the story of the discovery of asteroids and describe their typical orbits describe the composition and classification of the various types of asteroids discuss what was learned from spacecraft missions to several asteroids link to learning 436 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org “public” for information more at the level of this textbook.) watch this video about asteroid size comparison (https://openstax.org/l/30astsizecomp) for a dramatic visualization of the sizes of some better-known asteroids.