astronomy for mere mortals an introductory astronomy text aaron clevenson [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page1_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 2 copyright © 2024 aaron b. clevenson. all rights reserved. no part of these materials may be reproduced or distributed without the prior written permission of the author. acknowledgements / credits all photographs, unless otherwise indicated, are public domain. all astronomical photographs in this text are provided courtesy of nasa, unless otherwise indicated. (www.nasa.gov) all diagrams are original to the author, aaron clevenson, unless otherwise indicated. special thanks to david tomlin and john wakefield for their contributions, comments, edits, feedback, and support. also, special thanks to the astronomy students at lone star college - montgomery in the fall of 2016 for their tireless identification of mistakes in the text. nam et ipsa scientia potestas est. knowledge is power per aspera ad astra! through hard work we reach the stars. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 3 introduction welcome to the universe!
we earthlings spend our lives here on earth, busy in our affairs; we are born, we learn, we work, we have families, and we grow old. we are so consumed by the things we do, that we do not take the time to look up, to look at the heavens, and to enjoy the wonders of the universe. learning about astronomy is a way for all of us to share in that universe. there are planets, stars, and galaxies waiting to be found. we just need to look. the more we understand about how it all works and how it all fits together, the greater its grandeur. there are many quality texts available for astronomy, but they are often at a higher level than is appropriate for introductory astronomy courses taught often to non-science majors. new astronomers need a textbook that will facilitate learning and provide a way for them to incorporate astronomy components with things they already know. we want to incorporate astronomical terminology as the reader progresses through the material, but in a way that is clear and seamless for non-scientists. rather than create chapters that contain multiple components, we have broken the material into individual components.
they are arranged in a logical progression from the basics through planetary astronomy, the sun, stellar astronomy, and on through cosmology. this makes it easy for the reader to study components in the order that works best for them. another driving principle is to lower the financial threshold to new astronomers that are ready to take the plunge. this text is provided free to readers electronically. the knowledge contained in this text is free. the purpose of this text is to take a break in our busy lives, look into the depths of the universe, and to try to understand what we see. astronomy is part of physics, so to truly understand and appreciate what we see, there will be some physics involved. although the components do often build on previous components, they also stand alone to teach information on a specific topic. at the conclusion of studying this text, the reader will have an understanding of the universe and will see how the many pieces fit together. aaron clevenson astronomer astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 4 how to use this text the text assumes that this information may be conveyed as a single course, or as two courses of study: solar system astronomy, and stars and galaxies astronomy. rather than conventional chapters, the material is organized around components.
if you learn the material of the entire text, then you will have a complete picture of the universe. if you are learning the material as two courses, there are some components that are fundamental to both courses and are part of both courses, components 1 through 35 and components 96 through 102. these are the basics, history, measurements, the sun, and cosmology. • solar system astronomy includes: components 1 through 102 • stars and galaxies astronomy incudes: components 1 through 35 and 96 through 191 the courses have also been broken up into teaching units to make the material manageable. the solar system astronomy course has four teaching units, and the stars and galaxies astronomy course has five teaching units due to a larger amount of content. the first two units are identical when taught as two separate courses.