in 1905, einstein published three groundbreaking scientific papers: astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 468 figure 507: albert einstein public domain 1) demonstrating that light must be both emitted and absorbed in discrete “quanta” in order to explain how electrons are displaced from metals when irradiated by ultraviolet light – the so-called “photoelectric effect.” 2) demonstrating from statistical methods how the random movements of small pollen grains suspended in water must require the existence of molecules – the so-called “brownian motion.” 3) demonstrating from two postulates: 1) the constancy of the speed of light in any inertial reference frame (moving at a constant speed); and 2) treating all inertial reference frames as equivalent; einstein went on to show that the familiar concepts of space, time, and mass undergo transformations not in accord with newton’s laws of motion – the so-called “theory of special relativity.” a fourth paper, a few months later, demonstrated that mass and energy are equivalent, the now famous e=mc2. einstein was 26 years old. there was no immediate recognition by other physicists of these results, any of which were career-making publications.
the only significant change in his status in 1905 was that his provisional status as a patent examiner was changed to permanent. but the special theory of relativity is only valid for systems moving at constant velocity, and einstein began to wonder if relativity could be expanded to dynamical systems, systems that undergo accelerations. in 1907 he began to think about gravity. it occurred to him that a person in free-fall does not experience gravity. this is true for any object in free-fall, so all such reference frames are equivalent. further, a person standing on the earth experiences the force of gravity as 1g, which would be the exact experience a person in empty space in a spaceship propelled at a steady acceleration of 1g would feel. this equivalence is deceptively simple, and from it (and some rather daunting mathematics) would emerge the “general theory of relativity” in 1915. we need not immerse ourselves in 4-dimensional pseudo-riemannian geometry and curved space-time to appreciate the results of einstein’s quest.
the path of a light beam will be altered [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page468_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 469 figure 508: curvature of space by a gravitational field, as was first measured by english astronomer arthur stanley eddington (1882-1944), in may, 1919. gravity will cause a doppler red-shift in objects accelerating or decelerating relative to the earth. and the precession of mercury’s orbital perihelion that urbain leverrier had discovered but could not explain, was exactly accounted for in the theory by the effects of gravity on space-time. each of these effects was confirmed by astronomers. where einstein’s 1905 papers were virtually ignored, general relativity theory made einstein an international scientific superstar. the impact on cosmology was gradual but revolutionary. in 1917 einstein turned his attention to the universe as a whole, beginning the field of relativistic cosmology. in accord with the general views of the day, he assumed that the universe was static, and added a new parameter that did not emerge directly from his field equations, the cosmological constant, to force his equations to produce a static universe.
but other mathematicians, notably the russian, alexander friedmann (1888-1925), and the belgian priest georges henri joseph édouard lemaítre (1894-1966), pointed out those solutions to the field equations strongly implied that the space-time continuum must be expanding. in 1929, edwin hubble’s results on galactic red- shifts showed that the most distant galaxies were receding the fastest; therefore, the universe was expanding. a chagrined einstein exclaimed that his cosmological constant was the biggest blunder of his life. but all the predictions of general relativity theory, including gravitational waves, have been borne out by observation and experiment. theory and observation are in agreement: we live in an expanding universe. the solar system expands, too by the end of the 1920’s professional astronomy had become the province of ph.d.’s, huge telescopes, and precision instrumentation. it is interesting to note, then, that one of the most celebrated discoveries of the 20th century was made by a high school graduate with a 13-inch telescope.