especially important are the hydrocarbons, chemical compounds made up entirely of hydrogen and carbon, which serve as the basis for our biological chemistry, or biochemistry. while we do not understand the details of how life on earth began, it is clear that to make creatures like us possible, events like the ones we described must have occurred, resulting in what is called the chemical evolution of the universe. what made earth hospitable to life? about 5 billion years ago, a cloud of gas and dust in this cosmic neighborhood began to collapse under its own weight. out of this cloud formed the sun and its planets, together with all the smaller bodies, such as comets, that also orbit the sun (figure 30.2). the third planet from the sun, as it cooled, eventually allowed the formation of large quantities of liquid water on its surface. figure 30.2 comet hyakutake. this image was captured in 1996 by nasa photographer bill ingalls. comet impacts can deliver both water and a variety of interesting chemicals, including some organic chemicals, to earth.
(credit: nasa/bill ingalls) the chemical variety and moderate conditions on earth eventually led to the formation of molecules that could make copies of themselves (reproduce), which is essential for beginning life. over the billions of years of earth history, life evolved and became more complex. the course of evolution was punctuated by occasional planet- wide changes caused by collisions with some of the smaller bodies that did not make it into the sun or one of its accompanying worlds. as we saw in the chapter on earth as a planet, mammals may owe their domination of earth’s surface to just such a collision 65 million years ago, which led to the extinction of the dinosaurs (along with the majority of other living things). the details of such mass extinctions are currently the focus of a great deal of scientific interest.
through many twisting turns, the course of evolution on earth produced a creature with self-consciousness, describe the chemical and environmental conditions that make earth hospitable to life discuss the assumption underlying the copernican principle and outline its implications for modern- day astronomers understand the questions underlying the fermi paradox 1056 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1074_img1.jpeg] able to ask questions about its own origins and place in the cosmos (figure 30.3). like most of earth, this creature is composed of atoms that were forged in earlier generations of stars—in this case, assembled into both its body and brain. we might say that through the thoughts of human beings, the matter in the universe can become aware of itself. figure 30.3 young human. human beings have the intellect to wonder about their planet and what lies beyond it. through them (and perhaps other intelligent life), the universe becomes aware of itself. (credit: andrew fraknoi) think about those atoms in your body for a minute. they are merely on loan to you from the lending library of atoms that make up our local corner of the universe.
atoms of many kinds circulate through your body and then leave it—with each breath you inhale and exhale and the food you eat and excrete. even the atoms that take up more permanent residence in your tissues will not be part of you much longer than you are alive. ultimately, you will return your atoms to the vast reservoir of earth, where they will be incorporated into other structures and even other living things in the millennia to come. this picture of cosmic evolution, of our descent from the stars, has been obtained through the efforts of scientists in many fields over many decades. some of its details are still tentative and incomplete, but we feel reasonably confident in its broad outlines. it is remarkable how much we have been able to learn in the short time we have had the instruments to probe the physical nature of the universe. the copernican principle our study of astronomy has taught us that we have always been wrong in the past whenever we have claimed that earth is somehow unique. galileo, using the newly invented technology of the telescope, showed us that earth is not the center of the solar system, but merely one of a number of objects orbiting the sun.