beyond this general picture, researchers are still trying to determine why the magnetic fields are as large as they are, why the polarity of the field in each hemisphere flips from one cycle to the next, why the length of the solar cycle can vary from one cycle to the next, and why events like the maunder minimum occur. in this video (https://openstax.org/l/30magfield) solar scientist holly gilbert discusses the sun’s magnetic field. 15.3 solar activity above the photosphere learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: sunspots are not the only features that vary during a solar cycle. there are dramatic changes in the chromosphere and corona as well. to see what happens in the chromosphere, we must observe the emission lines from elements such as hydrogen and calcium, which emit useful spectral lines at the temperatures in that layer. the hot corona, on the other hand, can be studied by observations of x-rays and of extreme ultraviolet and other wavelengths at high energies.
link to learning describe the various ways in which the solar activity cycle manifests itself, including flares, coronal mass ejections, prominences, and plages 15.3 • solar activity above the photosphere 525 [image: astronomy_openstax_page543_img1.jpeg] plages and prominences as we saw, emission lines of hydrogen and calcium are produced in the hot gases of the chromosphere. astronomers routinely photograph the sun through filters that transmit light only at the wavelengths that correspond to these emission lines. pictures taken through these special filters show bright “clouds” in the chromosphere around sunspots; these bright regions are known as plages (figure 15.18). these are regions within the chromosphere that have higher temperature and density than their surroundings. the plages actually contain all of the elements in the sun, not just hydrogen and calcium. it just happens that the spectral lines of hydrogen and calcium produced by these clouds are bright and easy to observe. figure 15.18 plages on the sun. this image of the sun was taken with a filter that transmits only the light of the spectral line produced by singly ionized calcium. the bright cloud-like regions are the plages.
(credit: modification of work by nasa) moving higher into the sun’s atmosphere, we come to the spectacular phenomena called prominences (figure 15.19), which usually originate near sunspots. eclipse observers often see prominences as red features rising above the eclipsed sun and reaching high into the corona. some, the quiescent prominences, are graceful loops of plasma (ionized gas) that can remain nearly stable for many hours or even days. the relatively rare eruptive prominences appear to send matter upward into the corona at high speeds, and the most active surge prominences may move as fast as 1300 kilometers per second (almost 3 million miles per hour). some eruptive prominences have reached heights of more than 1 million kilometers above the photosphere; earth would be completely lost inside one of those awesome displays (figure 15.19). 526 15 • the sun: a garden-variety star access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page544_img1.jpeg] figure 15.19 prominences. (a) this image of an eruptive prominence was taken in the light of singly ionized helium in the extreme ultraviolet part of the spectrum.
the prominence is a particularly large one. an image of earth is shown at the same scale for comparison. (b) a prominence is a huge cloud of relatively cool (about 60,000 k in this case), fairly dense gas suspended in the much hotter corona. these pictures, taken in ultraviolet, are color coded so that white corresponds to the hottest temperatures and dark red to cooler ones. the four images were taken, moving clockwise from the upper left, on may 15, 2001; march 28, 2000; january 18, 2000; and february 2, 2001. (credit a: modification of work by nasa/soho; credit b: modification of work by nasa/sdo) flares and coronal mass ejections the most violent event on the surface of the sun is a rapid eruption called a solar flare (figure 15.20). a typical flare lasts for 5 to 10 minutes and releases a total amount of energy equivalent to that of perhaps a million hydrogen bombs. the largest flares last for several hours and emit enough energy to power the entire united states at its current rate of electrical consumption for 100,000 years.