if we look in detail at the spectrum of a star, we can determine whether it is a main- sequence star, a giant, or a supergiant. suppose, to start with the simplest example, that the spectrum, color, and other properties of a distant g2 star match those of the sun exactly. it is then reasonable to conclude that this distant star is likely to be a main- sequence star just like the sun and to have the same luminosity as the sun. but if there are subtle differences between the solar spectrum and the spectrum of the distant star, then the distant star may be a giant or even understand how spectral types are used to estimate stellar luminosities examine how these techniques are used by astronomers today 656 19 • celestial distances access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page674_img1.jpeg] a supergiant. the most widely used system of star classification divides stars of a given spectral class into six categories called luminosity classes.
these luminosity classes are denoted by roman numbers as follows: • ia: brightest supergiants • ib: less luminous supergiants • ii: bright giants • iii: giants • iv: subgiants (intermediate between giants and main-sequence stars) • v: main-sequence stars the full spectral specification of a star includes its luminosity class. for example, a main-sequence star with spectral class f3 is written as f3 v. the specification for an m2 giant is m2 iii. figure 19.15 illustrates the approximate position of stars of various luminosity classes on the h–r diagram. the dashed portions of the lines represent regions with very few or no stars. figure 19.15 luminosity classes. stars of the same temperature (or spectral class) can fall into different luminosity classes on the hertzsprung-russell diagram. by studying details of the spectrum for each star, astronomers can determine which luminosity class they fall in (whether they are main-sequence stars, giant stars, or supergiant stars). with both its spectral and luminosity classes known, a star’s position on the h–r diagram is uniquely determined.
since the diagram plots luminosity versus temperature, this means we can now read off the star’s luminosity (once its spectrum has helped us place it on the diagram). as before, if we know how luminous the star really is and see how dim it looks, the difference allows us to calculate its distance. (for historical reasons, astronomers sometimes call this method of distance determination spectroscopic parallax, even though the method has nothing to do with parallax.) the h–r diagram method allows astronomers to estimate distances to nearby stars, as well as some of the most distant stars in our galaxy, but it is anchored by measurements of parallax. the distances measured using parallax are the gold standard for distances: they rely on no assumptions, only geometry. once astronomers take a spectrum of a nearby star for which we also know the parallax, we know the luminosity that corresponds to that spectral type. nearby stars thus serve as benchmarks for more distant stars because we can assume that two stars with identical spectra have the same intrinsic luminosity.
19.4 • the h–r diagram and cosmic distances 657 [image: astronomy_openstax_page675_img1.jpeg] a few words about the real world introductory textbooks such as ours work hard to present the material in a straightforward and simplified way. in doing so, we sometimes do our students a disservice by making scientific techniques seem too clean and painless. in the real world, the techniques we have just described turn out to be messy and difficult, and often give astronomers headaches that last long into the day. for example, the relationships we have described such as the period-luminosity relation for certain variable stars aren’t exactly straight lines on a graph. the points representing many stars scatter widely when plotted, and thus, the distances derived from them also have a certain built-in scatter or uncertainty. the distances we measure with the methods we have discussed are therefore only accurate to within a certain percentage of error—sometimes 10%, sometimes 25%, sometimes as much as 50% or more. a 25% error for a star estimated to be 10,000 light-years away means it could be anywhere from 7500 to 12,500 light-years away.