explain how astronomers can tell whether a planetary surface is geologically young or old describe different methods for dating planets 7.3 • dating planetary surfaces 241 [image: astronomy_openstax_page259_img1.jpeg] on geologically active objects (including earth), vast outpourings of molten rock or the erosive effects of water and ice, which we call planet weathering, have erased evidence of earlier epochs and present us with only a relatively young surface for investigation. counting the craters one way to estimate the age of a surface is by counting the number of impact craters. this technique works because the rate at which impacts have occurred in the solar system has been roughly constant for several billion years. thus, in the absence of forces to eliminate craters, the number of craters is simply proportional to the length of time the surface has been exposed. this technique has been applied successfully to many solid planets and moons (figure 7.15). figure 7.15 our cratered moon. this composite image of the moon’s surface was made from many smaller images taken between november 2009 and february 2011 by the lunar reconnaissance orbiter (lro) and shows craters of many different sizes.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/gsfc/arizona state university) bear in mind that crater counts can tell us only the time since the surface experienced a major change that could modify or erase preexisting craters. estimating ages from crater counts is a little like walking along a sidewalk in a snowstorm after the snow has been falling steadily for a day or more. you may notice that in front of one house the snow is deep, while next door the sidewalk may be almost clear. do you conclude that less snow has fallen in front of ms. jones’ house than mr. smith’s? more likely, you conclude that jones has recently swept the walk clean and smith has not. similarly, the numbers of craters indicate how long it has been since a planetary surface was last “swept clean” by ongoing lava flows or by molten materials ejected when a large impact happened nearby. still, astronomers can use the numbers of craters on different parts of the same world to provide important clues about how regions on that world evolved. on a given planet or moon, the more heavily cratered terrain will generally be older (that is, more time will have elapsed there since something swept the region clean).
radioactive rocks another way to trace the history of a solid world is to measure the age of individual rocks. after samples were brought back from the moon by apollo astronauts, the techniques that had been developed to date rocks on earth were applied to rock samples from the moon to establish a geological chronology for the moon. furthermore, a few samples of material from the moon, mars, and the large asteroid vesta have fallen to earth as meteorites and can be examined directly (see the chapter on cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system). scientists measure the age of rocks using the properties of natural radioactivity. around the beginning of the twentieth century, physicists began to understand that some atomic nuclei are not stable but can split apart 242 7 • other worlds: an introduction to the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page260_img1.jpeg] (decay) spontaneously into smaller nuclei. the process of radioactive decay involves the emission of particles such as electrons, or of radiation in the form of gamma rays (see the chapter on radiation and spectra). for any one radioactive nucleus, it is not possible to predict when the decay process will happen.
such decay is random in nature, like the throw of dice: as gamblers have found all too often, it is impossible to say just when the dice will come up 7 or 11. but, for a very large number of dice tosses, we can calculate the odds that 7 or 11 will come up. similarly, if we have a very large number of radioactive atoms of one type (say, uranium), there is a specific time period, called its half-life, during which the chances are fifty-fifty that decay will occur for any of the nuclei. a particular nucleus may last a shorter or longer time than its half-life, but in a large sample, almost exactly half of the nuclei will have decayed after a time equal to one half-life. half of the remaining nuclei will have decayed after two half-lives pass, leaving only one half of a half—or one quarter—of the original sample (figure 7.16). figure 7.16 radioactive decay. this graph shows (in pink) the amount of a radioactive sample that remains after several half-lives have passed.