luckily, no such rules apply at the level of human behavior. but at the microscopic level of the atom, experiment after experiment has confirmed the validity of bohr’s strange idea. bohr’s suggestions became one of the foundations of the new (and much more sophisticated) model of the subatomic world called quantum mechanics. in bohr’s model, if the electron moves from one orbit to another closer to the atomic nucleus, it must give up some energy in the form of electromagnetic radiation. if the electron goes from an inner orbit to one farther from the nucleus, however, it requires some additional energy. one way to obtain the necessary energy is to absorb electromagnetic radiation that may be streaming past the atom from an outside source. a key feature of bohr’s model is that each of the permitted electron orbits around a given atom has a certain energy value; we therefore can think of each orbit as an energy level. to move from one orbit to another (which will have its own specific energy value) requires a change in the electron’s energy—a change determined by the difference between the two energy values. if the electron goes to a lower level, the energy difference will be given off; if the electron goes to a higher level, the energy difference must be obtained from somewhere else.
each jump (or transition) to a different level has a fixed and definite energy change associated with it. a crude analogy for this situation might be life in a tower of luxury apartments where the rent is determined by the quality of the view. such a building has certain, definite numbered levels or floors on which apartments are located. no one can live on floor 5.37 or 22.5. in addition, the rent gets higher as you go up to higher floors. if you want to exchange an apartment on the twentieth floor for one on the second floor, you will not owe as much rent. however, if you want to move from the third floor to the twenty-fifth floor, your rent will increase. in an atom, too, the “cheapest” place for an electron to live is the lowest possible level, and energy is required to move to a higher level. here we have one of the situations where it is easier to think of electromagnetic radiation as particles 5.4 • the structure of the atom 163 (photons) rather than as waves. as electrons move from one level to another, they give off or absorb little packets of energy.
when an electron moves to a higher level, it absorbs a photon of just the right energy (provided one is available). when it moves to a lower level, it emits a photon with the exact amount of energy it no longer needs in its “lower-cost living situation.” the photon and wave perspectives must be equivalent: light is light, no matter how we look at it. thus, each photon carries a certain amount of energy that is proportional to the frequency (f) of the wave it represents. the value of its energy (e) is given by the formula where the constant of proportionality, h, is called planck’s constant. the constant is named for max planck, the german physicist who was one of the originators of the quantum theory (figure 5.18). if metric units are used (that is, if energy is measured in joules and frequency in hertz), then planck’s constant has the value h = 6.626 × 10–34 joule-seconds (j-s). higher-energy photons correspond to higher-frequency waves (which have a shorter wavelength); lower-energy photons are waves of lower frequency.
figure 5.18 niels bohr (1885–1962) and max planck (1858–1947). (a) bohr, shown at his desk in this 1935 photograph, and (b) planck helped us understand the energy behavior of photons. to take a specific example, consider a calcium atom inside the sun’s atmosphere in which an electron jumps from a lower level to a higher level. to do this, it needs about joules of energy, which it can conveniently obtain by absorbing a passing photon of that energy coming from deeper inside the sun. this photon is equivalent to a wave of light whose frequency is about hertz and whose wavelength is about meters (393 nanometers), in the deep violet part of the visible light spectrum. although it may seem strange at first to switch from picturing light as a photon (or energy packet) to picturing it as a wave, such switching has become second nature to astronomers and can be a handy tool for doing calculations about spectra. e x a m p l e 5 .