read frank drake’s own account (https://openstax.org/l/30drakeequat) of how he came up with his “equation.” and here is a recent interview (https://openstax.org/l/30frandrakinter) with frank drake by one link to learning 30.4 • the search for extraterrestrial intelligence 1083 of the authors of this textbook. explore an alternate version of the drake equation (https://openstax.org/l/30altdrakeeq) that uses the number of stars in the galaxy and the fraction of civilizations around now, rather than the star formation rate and civilization lifespan. see how different values for the terms of the equation lead to different outcomes in the estimate of the number of technological civilizations that exist now. seti outside the radio realm for the reasons discussed above, most seti programs search for signals at radio wavelengths. but in science, if there are other approaches to answering an unsolved question, we don’t want to neglect them. so astronomers have been thinking about other ways we could pick up evidence for the existence of technologically advanced civilizations. recently, technology has allowed astronomers to expand the search into the domain of visible light.
you might think that it would be hopeless to try to detect a flash of visible light from a planet given the brilliance of the star it orbits. this is why we usually cannot measure the reflected light of planets around other stars. the feeble light of the planet is simply swamped by the “big light” in the neighborhood. so another civilization would need a mighty strong beacon to compete with their star. however, in recent years, human engineers have learned how to make flashes of light brighter than the sun. the trick is to “turn on” the light for a very brief time, so that the costs are manageable. but ultra-bright, ultra- short laser pulses (operating for periods of a billionth of a second) can pack a lot of energy and can be coded to carry a message. we also have the technology to detect such short pulses—not with human senses, but with special detectors that can be “tuned” to hunt automatically for such short bursts of light from nearby stars. why would any civilization try to outshine its own star in this way? it turns out that the cost of sending an ultra- short laser pulse in the direction of a few promising stars can be less than the cost of sweeping a continuous radio message across the whole sky.
or perhaps they, too, have a special fondness for light messages because one of their senses evolved using light. several programs are now experimenting with “optical seti” searches, which can be done with only a modest telescope. (the term optical here means using visible light.) if we let our imaginations expand, we might think of other for technosignatures—signs of technology from other civilizations. for example, what if a truly advanced civilization should decide to (or need to) renovate its planetary system to maximize the area for life? it could do so by breaking apart some planets or moons and building a ring of solid material that surrounds or encloses the star and intercepts some or all of its light. this huge artificial ring or sphere might glow very brightly at infrared wavelengths, as the starlight it receives is eventually converted to heat and re-radiated into space. that infrared radiation could be detected by our instruments, and searches for such infrared sources are also underway (figure 30.22). 1084 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org figure 30.22 wide-field infrared survey explorer (wise).
astronomers have used this infrared satellite to search for infrared signatures of enormous construction projects by very advanced civilizations, but their first survey did not reveal any. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech) should we transmit in addition to listening? our planet has some leakage of radio waves into space, from fm radio, television, military radars, and communication between earth and our orbiting spacecraft. however, such leakage radiation is still quite weak, and therefore difficult to detect at the distances of the stars, at least with the radio technology we have. so at the present time our attempts to communicate with other civilizations that may be out there mostly involve trying to receive messages, but not sending any ourselves. some scientists, however, think that it is inconsistent to search for beacons from other civilizations without announcing our presence in a similar way. (we discussed earlier the problem that if every other civilization confined itself to listening, no one would ever get in touch.) so, should we be making regular attempts at sending easily decoded messages into space? some scientists warn that our civilization is too immature and defenseless to announce ourselves at this early point in our development.