if you shine the flashlight straight on, you get an intense spot of light on the wall. but if you hold the flashlight at an angle (if the wall “leans out” of the beam), then the spot of light is more spread out. like the straight-on light, the sunlight in june is more direct and intense in the northern hemisphere, and hence more effective at heating. figure 4.6 the sun’s rays in summer and winter. (a) in summer, the sun appears high in the sky and its rays hit earth more directly, spreading out less. (b) in winter, the sun is low in the sky and its rays spread out over a much wider area, becoming less effective at heating the ground. the second effect has to do with the length of time the sun spends above the horizon (figure 4.7). even if you’ve never thought about astronomy before, we’re sure you have observed that the hours of daylight increase in summer and decrease in winter. let’s see why this happens. 1 note that the dates indicated for the solstices and equinoxes are approximate; depending on the year, they may occur a day or two earlier or later.
106 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page124_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page124_img2.jpeg] figure 4.7 the sun’s path in the sky for different seasons. on june 21, the sun rises north of east and sets north of west. for observers in the northern hemisphere of earth, the sun spends about 15 hours above the horizon in the united states, meaning more hours of daylight. on december 21, the sun rises south of east and sets south of west. it spends 9 hours above the horizon in the united states, which means fewer hours of daylight and more hours of night in northern lands (and a strong need for people to hold celebrations to cheer themselves up). on march 21 and september 21, the sun spends equal amounts of time above and below the horizon in both hemispheres. as we saw in observing the sky: the birth of astronomy, an equivalent way to look at our path around the sun each year is to pretend that the sun moves around earth (on a circle called the ecliptic).
because earth’s axis is tilted, the ecliptic is tilted by about 23.5° relative to the celestial equator (review figure 2.7). as a result, where we see the sun in the sky changes as the year wears on. in june, the sun is north of the celestial equator and spends more time with those who live in the northern hemisphere. it rises high in the sky and is above the horizon in the united states for as long as 15 hours. thus, the sun not only heats us with more direct rays, but it also has more time to do it each day. (notice in figure 4.7 that the northern hemisphere’s gain is the southern hemisphere’s loss. there the june sun is low in the sky, meaning fewer daylight hours. in chile, for example, june is a colder, darker time of year.) in december, when the sun is south of the celestial equator, the situation is reversed. the university of nebraska’s seasons simulation (https://openstax.org/l/30nebseasonsim) provides an overview of how earth’s tilt combines with its orbital motion, illustrating how the angle of sunlight changes throughout the year.
let’s look at what the sun’s illumination on earth looks like at some specific dates of the year, when these effects are at their maximum. on or about june 21 (the date we who live in the northern hemisphere call the summer solstice or sometimes the first day of summer), the sun shines down most directly upon the northern hemisphere of earth. it appears about 23° north of the equator, and thus, on that date, it passes through the zenith of places on earth that are at 23° n latitude. the situation is shown in detail in figure 4.8. to a person at 23° n (near hawaii, for example), the sun is directly overhead at noon. this latitude, where the sun can appear at the zenith at noon on the first day of summer, is called the tropic of cancer. we also see in figure 4.8 that the sun’s rays shine down all around the north pole at the solstice. as earth turns on its axis, the north pole is continuously illuminated by the sun; all places within 23° of the pole have sunshine for 24 hours.