from doppler shifts of the spectral lines in the light coming from the east and west edges of the sun, astronomers find that the radial velocities of the two edges differ by about 4 km/s, meaning that the sun’s rotation rate is 2 km/s. find the approximate period of rotation of the sun in days. the circumference of a sphere is given by , where is the radius of the sphere. 25. assuming an average sunspot cycle of 11 years, how many revolutions does the equator of the sun make during that one cycle? do higher latitudes make more or fewer revolutions compared to the equator? 26. this chapter gives the average sunspot cycle as 11 years. verify this using figure 15.26. 27. the escape velocity from any astronomical object can be calculated as . using the data in appendix e, calculate the escape velocity from the photosphere of the sun. since coronal mass ejections escape from the corona, would the escape velocity from there be more or less than from the photosphere? 28. suppose you observe a major solar flare while astronauts are orbiting earth. use the data in the text to calculate how long it will before the charged particles ejected from the sun during the flare reach them.
29. suppose an eruptive prominence rises at a speed of 150 km/s. if it does not change speed, how far from the photosphere will it extend after 3 hours? how does this distance compare with the diameter of earth? 30. from the information in figure 15.21, estimate the speed with which the particles in the cme in parts (c) 15 • exercises 541 and (d) are moving away from the sun. 542 15 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 16.1 the sun. it takes an incredible amount of energy for the sun to shine, as it has and will continue to do for billions of years. (credit: modification of work by ed dunens) chapter outline 16.1 sources of sunshine: thermal and gravitational energy 16.2 mass, energy, and the theory of relativity 16.3 the solar interior: theory 16.4 the solar interior: observations thinking ahead the sun puts out an incomprehensible amount of energy—so much that its ultraviolet radiation can cause sunburns from 93 million miles away. it is also very old.
as you learned earlier, evidence shows that the sun formed about 4.5 billion years ago and has been shining ever since. how can the sun produce so much energy for so long? the sun’s energy output is about watts. this is unimaginably bright: brighter than a trillion cities together each with a trillion 100-watt light bulbs. most known methods of generating energy fall far short of the capacity of the sun. the total amount of energy produced over the entire life of the sun is staggering, since the sun has been shining for billions of years. scientists were unable to explain the seemingly unlimited energy of stars like the sun prior to the twentieth century. 16.1 sources of sunshine: thermal and gravitational energy learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: energy is a challenging concept to grasp because it exists in so many different forms that it defies any single simple explanation.
in many ways, comprehending energy is like comprehending wealth: there are very identify different forms of energy understand the law of conservation of energy explain ways that energy can be transformed the sun: a nuclear powerhouse 16 [image: astronomy_openstax_page561_img1.jpeg] different forms of wealth and they follow different rules, depending on if they are the stock market, real estate, a collection of old comic books, great piles of cash, or one of the many other ways to make and lose money. it is easier to discuss one or two forms of wealth—or energy—than to discuss that concept in general. when striving to understand how the sun can put out so much energy for so long, scientists considered many different types of energy. nineteenth-century scientists knew of two possible sources for the sun’s energy: chemical and gravitational energy. the source of chemical energy most familiar to them was the burning (the chemical term is oxidation) of wood, coal, gasoline, or other fuel. we know exactly how much energy the burning of these materials can produce. we can thus calculate that even if the immense mass of the sun consisted of a burnable material like coal or wood, our star could not produce energy at its present rate for more than few thousand years.