the automated spacecraft homed in on this tiny target and returned a spectacular set of images as it approached at 6 km/s. the primary mission objective was to measure the momentum the collision transferred to the target asteroid by tracking the change in the orbital period of dimorphos using telescopes on earth. the post-impact period was shortened by 32 minutes, which showed us that the large plume of ejected debris (visible in earth-based telescopes) transferred additional momentum beyond that of the spacecraft impact itself, amplifying the collision by about a factor of three. the hera mission is a follow-up european spacecraft, launched in 2024, on a two-year flight to the didymos system. it will rendezvous with dimorphos to improve our knowledge of the dart results by measuring the mass and composition of dimorphos and examining the impact crater we made. planetary defense has become a subject of increasing international interest. the united nations has formed two technical committees on planetary defense, recognizing that the entire planet is at risk from asteroid impacts. however, the fundamental problem remains one of finding neas in time for defensive measures to be taken. we must be able to find the next impactor before it finds us. and that’s a job for the astronomers!
the search will expand significantly using the new rubin wide-field telescope and a planned nasa search with the neo surveyor satellite, now under development. 13.2 • asteroids and planetary defense 449 [image: astronomy_openstax_page467_img1.jpeg] 13.3 the “long-haired” comets learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: comets differ from asteroids primarily in their icy composition, a difference that causes them to brighten dramatically as they approach the sun, forming a temporary atmosphere. in some early cultures, these so- called “hairy stars” were considered omens of disaster. today, we no longer fear comets, but eagerly anticipate those that come close enough to us to put on a good sky show. appearance of comets a comet is a relatively small chunk of icy material (typically a few kilometers across) that develops an atmosphere as it approaches the sun. later, there may be a very faint, nebulous tail, extending several million kilometers away from the main body of the comet. comets have been observed from the earliest times: accounts of comets are found in the histories of virtually all ancient civilizations.
the typical comet, however, is not spectacular in our skies, instead having the appearance of a rather faint, diffuse spot of light somewhat smaller than the moon and many times less brilliant. (comets seemed more spectacular to people before the invention of artificial lighting, which compromises our view of the night sky.) like the moon and planets, comets appear to wander among the stars, slowly shifting their positions in the sky from night to night. unlike the planets, however, most comets appear at unpredictable times, which perhaps explain why they frequently inspired fear and superstition in earlier times. comets typically remain visible for periods that vary from a couple of weeks to several months. we’ll say more about what they are made of and how they become visible after we discuss their motions. note that still images of comets give the impression that they are moving rapidly across the sky, like a bright meteor or shooting star. looking only at such images, it is easy to confuse comets and meteors. but seen in the real sky, they are very different: the meteor burns up in our atmosphere and is gone in a few seconds, whereas the comet may be visible for weeks in nearly the same part of the sky.
comet orbits the study of comets as members of the solar system dates from the time of isaac newton, who first suggested that they orbited the sun on extremely elongated ellipses. newton’s colleague edmund halley (see the edmund halley: astronomy’s renaissance man feature box) developed these ideas, and in 1705, he published calculations of 24 comet orbits. in particular, he noted that the orbits of the bright comets that had appeared in the years 1531, 1607, and 1682 were so similar that the three could well be the same comet, returning to perihelion (closest approach to the sun) at average intervals of 76 years. if so, he predicted that the object should next return about 1758. although halley had died by the time the comet appeared as he predicted, it was given the name comet halley (rhymes with “valley”) in honor of the astronomer who first recognized it as a permanent member of our solar system, orbiting around the sun. its aphelion (furthest point from the sun) is beyond the orbit of neptune.