observations also indicate that most of the gas in elliptical galaxies was converted to stars by the time the universe was about 3 billion years old, so it appears that elliptical galaxies have not formed many new stars since then. they are often said to be “red and dead”—that is, they mostly contain old, cool, red stars, and there is little or no new star formation going on. these observations (when considered together) suggest that the giant elliptical galaxies that we see nearby formed from a combination of both top-down and bottom-up mechanisms, with the most massive galaxies forming in the densest clusters where both processes happened very early and quickly in the history of the universe. the situation with spiral galaxies is apparently very different. the bulges of these galaxies formed early, like the elliptical galaxies (figure 28.27). however, the disks formed later (remember that the stars in the disk of the milky way are younger than the stars in the bulge and the halo) and still contain gas and dust. however, the rate of star formation in spirals today is about ten times lower than it was 8 billion years ago. the number of stars being formed drops as the gas is used up.
so spirals seem to form mostly “bottom up” but over a longer time than ellipticals and in a more complex way, with at least two distinct phases. 28.5 • the formation and evolution of galaxies and structure in the universe 991 figure 28.27 growth of spiral bulges. the nuclear bulges of some spiral galaxies formed through the collapse of a single protogalactic cloud (top row). others grew over time through mergers with other smaller galaxies (bottom row). hubble originally thought that elliptical galaxies were young and would eventually turn into spirals, an idea we now know is not true. in fact, as we saw above, it’s more likely the other way around: two spirals that crash together under their mutual gravity can turn into an elliptical. despite these advances in our understanding of how galaxies form and evolve, many questions remain. for example, it’s even possible, given current evidence, that spiral galaxies could lose their spiral arms and disks in a merger event, making them look more like an elliptical or irregular galaxy, and then regain the disk and arms again later if enough gas remains available. the story of how galaxies assume their final shapes is still being written as we learn more about galaxies and their environment.
forming galaxy clusters, superclusters, voids, and filaments if individual galaxies seem to grow mostly by assembling smaller pieces together gravitationally over cosmic time, what about the clusters of galaxies and larger structures such as those seen in figure 28.21? how do we explain the large-scale maps that show galaxies distributed on the walls of huge sponge- or bubble-like structures spanning hundreds of millions of light-years? as we saw, observations have found increasing evidence for concentrations, filaments, clusters, and superclusters of galaxies when the universe was less than 3 billion years old (figure 28.28). this means that large concentrations of galaxies had already come together when the universe was less than a quarter as old 992 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1010_img1.jpeg] as it is now. figure 28.28 merging galaxies in a distant cluster. this hubble image shows the core of one of the most distant galaxy clusters yet discovered, sparcs 1049+56; we are seeing it as it was nearly 10 billion years ago.
the surprise delivered by the image was the “train wreck” of chaotic galaxy shapes and blue tidal tails: apparently there are several galaxies right in the core that are merging together, the probable cause of a massive burst of star formation and bright infrared emission from the cluster. (credit: modification of work by nasa/stsci/esa/jpl-caltech/mcgill) almost all the currently favored models of how large-scale structure formed in the universe tell a story similar to that for individual galaxies: tiny dark matter “seeds” in the hot cosmic soup after the big bang grew by gravity into larger and larger structures as cosmic time ticked on (figure 28.29). the final models we construct will need to be able to explain the size, shape, age, number, and spatial distribution of galaxies, clusters, and filaments—not only today, but also far back in time. therefore, astronomers are working hard to measure and then to model those features of large-scale structure as accurately as possible. so far, a mixture of 5% normal atoms, 27% cold dark matter, and 68% dark energy seems to be the best way to explain all the evidence currently available (see the big bang).