this is short-range force, only capable of acting over distances about the size of the atomic nucleus. a quick thought experiment shows how 16.2 • mass, energy, and the theory of relativity 549 [image: astronomy_openstax_page567_img1.jpeg] important this force is. take a look at your finger and consider the atoms composing it. among them is carbon, one of the basic elements of life. focus your imagination on the nucleus of one of your carbon atoms. it contains six protons, which have a positive charge, and six neutrons, which are neutral. thus, the nucleus has a net charge of six positives. if only the electrical force were acting, the protons in this and every carbon atom would find each other very repulsive and fly apart. the strong nuclear force is an attractive force, stronger than the electrical force, and it keeps the particles of the nucleus tightly bound together. we saw earlier that if under the force of gravity a star “shrinks”—bringing its atoms closer together—gravitational energy is released. in the same way, if particles come together under the strong nuclear force and unite to form an atomic nucleus, some of the nuclear energy is released.
the energy given up in such a process is called the binding energy of the nucleus. when such binding energy is released, the resulting nucleus has slightly less mass than the sum of the masses of the particles that came together to form it. in other words, the energy comes from the loss of mass. this slight deficit in mass is only a small fraction of the mass of one proton. but because each bit of lost mass can provide a lot of energy (remember, e = mc2), this nuclear energy release can be quite substantial. measurements show that the binding energy is greatest for atoms with a mass near that of the iron nucleus (with a combined number of protons and neutrons equal to 56) and less for both the lighter and the heavier nuclei. iron, therefore, is the most stable element: since it gives up the most energy when it forms, it would require the most energy to break it back down into its component particles. what this means is that, in general, when light atomic nuclei come together to form a heavier one (up to iron), mass is lost and energy is released. this joining together of atomic nuclei is called nuclear fusion.
energy can also be produced by breaking up heavy atomic nuclei into lighter ones (down to iron); this process is called nuclear fission. nuclear fission was the process we learned to use first—in atomic bombs and in nuclear reactors used to generate electrical power—and it may therefore be more familiar to you. fission also sometimes occurs spontaneously in some unstable nuclei through the process of natural radioactivity. but fission requires big, complex nuclei, whereas we know that the stars are made up predominantly of small, simple nuclei. so we must look to fusion first to explain the energy of the sun and the stars (figure 16.5). figure 16.5 fusion and fission. (a) in fusion, light atomic nuclei join together to form a heavier nuclei, releasing energy in the process. (b) in fission, energy is produced by the breaking up of heavy, complex nuclei into lighter ones. nuclear attraction versus electrical repulsion so far, we seem to have a very attractive prescription for producing the energy emitted by the sun: “roll” some nuclei together and join them via nuclear fusion. this will cause them to lose some of their mass, which then turns into energy.
however, every nucleus beyond simple hydrogen has two or more protons—and protons all have positive charges. since like charges repel via the electrical force, the closer we get two nuclei to each other, the more they repel. it’s true that if we can get them within “striking distance” of the nuclear force, they will then come together with a much stronger attraction. but that striking distance is very tiny, about the size of a nucleus. how can we get nuclei close enough to participate in fusion? 550 16 • the sun: a nuclear powerhouse access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page568_img1.jpeg] the answer turns out to be heat—tremendous heat—which speeds the protons up enough to overcome the electrical forces that try to keep protons apart. inside the sun, as we saw, the most common element is hydrogen, whose nucleus contains only a single proton. two protons can fuse only in regions where the temperature is greater than about 12 million k, and the speed of the protons average around 1000 kilometers per second or more.