amino acids can have either kind of symmetry, but all life on earth has evolved using only the left-handed versions to make proteins. the presence of both kinds of amino acids clearly demonstrates that the ones in the meteorites had an extraterrestrial origin. 14.2 • meteorites: stones from heaven 485 figure 14.10 murchison meteorite. a fragment of the meteorite that fell near the small town of murchison, australia, is shown next to a small sample of its material in a test tube, used for analysis of its chemical makeup. these naturally occurring amino acids and other complex organic molecules in murchison—formed without the benefit of the sheltering environment of planet earth—show that a great deal of interesting chemistry must have taken place when the solar system was forming. if so, then perhaps some of the molecular building blocks of life on earth were first delivered by primitive meteorites and comets. this is an interesting idea because our planet was probably much too hot for any organic materials to survive its earliest history. but after earth’s surface cooled, the asteroid and comet fragments that pelted it could have refreshed its supply of organic materials.
14.3 formation of the solar system learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: as we have seen, the comets, asteroids, and meteorites are surviving remnants from the processes that formed the solar system. the planets, moons, and the sun, of course, also are the products of the formation process, although the material in them has undergone a wide range of changes. we are now ready to put together the information from all these objects to discuss what is known about the origin of the solar system. observational constraints there are certain basic properties of the planetary system that any theory of its formation must explain. these may be summarized under three categories: motion constraints, chemical constraints, and age constraints. we call them constraints because they place restrictions on our theories; unless a theory can explain the observed facts, it will not survive in the competitive marketplace of ideas that characterizes the endeavor of science. let’s take a look at these constraints one by one. there are many regularities to the motions in the solar system. we saw that the planets all revolve around the sun in the same direction and approximately in the plane of the sun’s own rotation.
in addition, most of the planets rotate in the same direction as they revolve, and most of the moons also move in counterclockwise orbits (when seen from the north). with the exception of the comets and other trans-neptunian objects, the motions of the system members define a disk or frisbee shape. nevertheless, a full theory must also be prepared to deal with the exceptions to these trends, such as the retrograde rotation (not revolution) of venus. describe the motion, chemical, and age constraints that must be met by any theory of solar system formation summarize the physical and chemical changes during the solar nebula stage of solar system formation explain the formation process of the terrestrial and giant planets describe the main events of the further evolution of the solar system 486 14 • cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page504_img1.jpeg] in the realm of chemistry, we saw that jupiter and saturn have approximately the same composition—dominated by hydrogen and helium.
these are the two largest planets, with sufficient gravity to hold on to any gas present when and where they formed; thus, we might expect them to be representative of the original material out of which the solar system formed. each of the other members of the planetary system is, to some degree, lacking in the light elements. a careful examination of the composition of solid solar- system objects shows a striking progression from the metal-rich inner planets, through those made predominantly of rocky materials, out to objects with ice-dominated compositions in the outer solar system. the comets in the oort cloud and the trans-neptunian objects in the kuiper belt are also icy objects, whereas the asteroids represent a transitional rocky composition with abundant dark, carbon-rich material. as we saw in other worlds: an introduction to the solar system, this general chemical pattern can be interpreted as a temperature sequence: hot near the sun and cooler as we move outward. the inner parts of the system are generally missing those materials that could not condense (form a solid) at the high temperatures found near the sun. however, there are (again) important exceptions to the general pattern.