one of the major goals of this telescope is to observe directly the light of the first galaxies and even the first stars to shine. the most distant galaxy observed with it, as of this writing, was already formed a mere 330 million years after the big bang. the atacama large millimeter array (alma) in chile has detected far-infrared and millimeter-wave radiation from massive star-bursting galaxies and has also measured redshifts that show that these galaxies were already in existence only a few hundred million years after the expansion of the universe began. (note these young galaxies are being detected at infrared and millimeter wavelengths because their high redshifts shift the electromagnetic radiation that they emit to very long wavelengths.) astronomers were initially surprised to find that galaxies could form so quickly, and they are now exploring new models that incorporate ordinary matter, dark matter with various properties, and even massive primordial black holes that formed soon after the big bang, to explain the rapid, early formation of galaxies. at this point, if you have been thinking about our discussions of the expanding universe in galaxies, you may be wondering what exactly in figure 28.21 is expanding.
we know that the galaxies and clusters of galaxies are held together by their gravity and do not expand as the universe does. however, the voids do grow larger and the filaments move farther apart as space stretches (see the big bang). 28.3 • the distribution of galaxies in space 981 astronomy and technology: the sloan digital sky survey in edwin hubble’s day, spectra of galaxies had to be taken one at a time. the faint light of a distant galaxy gathered by a large telescope was put through a slit, and then a spectrometer (also called a spectrograph) was used to separate the colors and record the spectrum. this was a laborious process, ill suited to the demands of making large-scale maps that require the redshifts of many thousands of galaxies. but new technology has come to the rescue of astronomers who seek three-dimensional maps of the universe of galaxies. one ambitious survey of the sky was produced using a special telescope, camera, and spectrograph atop the sacramento mountains of new mexico.
called the sloan digital sky survey (sdss), after the foundation that provided a large part of the funding, the program used a 2.5-meter telescope (about the same aperture as the hubble) as a wide-angle astronomical camera. during a mapping program lasting more than ten years, astronomers used the sdss’s 30 charge-coupled devices (ccds)—sensitive electronic light detectors similar to those used in many digital cameras and cell phones—to take images of over 500 million objects and spectra of over 3 million, covering more than one-quarter of the celestial sphere. like many large projects in modern science, the sloan survey involved scientists and engineers from many different institutions, ranging from universities to national laboratories. every clear night for more than a decade, astronomers used the instrument to make images recording the position and brightness of celestial objects in long strips of the sky. the information in each strip was digitally recorded and preserved for future generations. when the seeing (recall this term from astronomical instruments) was only adequate, the telescope was used for taking spectra of galaxies and quasars—but it did so for up to 640 objects at a time.
the key to the success of the project was a series of optical fibers, thin tubes of flexible glass that can transmit light from a source to the ccd that then records the spectrum. after taking images of a part of the sky and identifying which objects are galaxies, project scientists drilled an aluminum plate with holes for attaching fibers at the location of each galaxy. the telescope was then pointed at the right section of the sky, and the fibers led the light of each galaxy to the spectrometer for individual recording (figure 28.22). figure 28.22 sloan digital sky survey. (a) the sloan digital sky survey telescope is seen here in front of the sacramento mountains in new mexico. (b) astronomer richard kron inserts some of the optical fibers into the pre-drilled plate to enable the instruments to make many spectra of galaxies at the same time. (credit a, b: modification of work by the sloan digital sky survey) about an hour was sufficient for each set of spectra, and the pre-drilled aluminum plates could be switched quickly.