furthermore, from a distance, planets are lost in the glare of their much-brighter parent stars. disks around protostars: planetary systems in formation it is a lot easier to detect the spread-out raw material from which planets might be assembled than to detect planets after they are fully formed. from our study of the solar system, we understand that planets form by the gathering together of gas and dust particles in orbit around a newly created star. each dust particle is heated by the young protostar and radiates in the infrared region of the spectrum. before any planets form, we can detect such radiation from all of the spread-out individual dust particles that are destined to become parts of planets. we can also detect the silhouette of the disk if it blocks bright light coming from a source behind it (figure 21.13). figure 21.13 disks around protostars. these hubble space telescope images show four disks around young stars in the orion nebula. the dark, dusty disks are seen silhouetted against the bright backdrop of the glowing gas in the nebula.
the size of each image is about 30 times the diameter of our planetary system; this means the disks we see here range in size from two to eight times the orbit of pluto. the red glow at the center of each disk is a young star, no more than a million years old. these images correspond to the stage in the life of a protostar shown in part (d) of figure 21.8. (credit: modification of work by mark mccaughrean (max-planck-institute for astronomy), c. robert o’dell (rice university), and nasa) once the dust particles gather together and form a few planets (and maybe some moons), the overwhelming majority of the dust is hidden in the interiors of the planets where we cannot see it. all we can now detect is the radiation from the outside surfaces, which cover a drastically smaller area than the huge, dusty disk from which they formed. the amount of infrared radiation is therefore greatest before the dust particles combine into planets. for this reason, our search for planets begins with a search for infrared radiation from the material required to make them. a disk of gas and dust appears to be an essential part of star formation.
observations show that nearly all very young protostars have disks and that the disks range in size from 10 to 1000 au. (for comparison, the average diameter of the orbit of pluto, which can be considered the rough size of our own planetary system, is 80 au, whereas the outer diameter of the kuiper belt of smaller icy bodies is about 100 au.) the mass contained in trace the evolution of dust surrounding a protostar, leading to the development of rocky planets and gas giants estimate the timescale for growth of planets using observations of the disks surrounding young stars evaluate evidence for planets around forming stars based on the structures seen in images of the circumstellar dust disks 712 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page730_img1.jpeg] these disks is typically 1–10% of the mass of our own sun, which is more than the mass of all the planets in our solar system put together. such observations already demonstrate that a large fraction of stars begin their lives with enough material in the right place to form a planetary system.
we should also note that observations of these disks around the youngest stars, carried out in the infrared, can reveal the presence of the kinds of interstellar molecules we discussed in interstellar gas. the james webb space telescope is being used by several teams of astronomers to discover such molecules, and their work has already found evidence for such interesting molecules as benzene, ethane, acetic acid (the key ingredient in vinegar), and formaldehyde (“embalming fluid”) in the disks. the timing of planet formation and growth we can use observations of how the disks change with time to estimate how long it takes for planets to form. if we measure the temperature and luminosity of a protostar, then, as we saw, we can place it in an h–r diagram like the one shown in figure 21.12. by comparing the real star with our models of how protostars should evolve with time, we can estimate its age. we can then look at how the disks we observe change with the ages of the stars that they surround.