a tropical year is approximately 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, and 45 seconds (or roughly 365.25 days). a sidereal year is 20 minutes and 24.5 seconds longer than the tropical year (or roughly 20.5 minutes longer). months as the moon orbits the earth it makes one orbit in a month. the synodic month is the time it takes the moon to return to the exact same phase and is dependent on the location of the sun relative to the earth and the moon. this is the time it takes to go from one full moon, through the phases, and back to the next full moon. a synodic month is on average 29 days, 12 hours, 44 minutes, and 2.8016 seconds (or roughly 29.5 days). a sidereal month is the time required for the moon to return to the same right ascension in the sky as it was the previous month. a sidereal month is 27 days, 7 hours, 43 minutes, and 11.5 seconds (or roughly 27.5 days). the sidereal month is about 2 days shorter than the synodic month.
this difference is due to the fact that the earth is moving in its orbit around the sun while the moon is orbiting the earth. sidereal relates to the position of the stars astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 36 days as the earth rotates on its axis, sometimes we are facing the sun and sometimes we are facing away from the sun. a solar day is defined as the time it takes for the sun to go from directly south on one day to directly south the next day (solar transits). a sidereal day is the time it takes a star to go from directly south on one day to directly south the next day. but during that day, the earth has moved about 1 degree around the sun. a sidereal day is 23 hours, 56 minutes long. the solar day is about four minutes longer and is our 24-hour day. figure 24: earth months .
figure 25: earth days [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page36_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page36_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 37 seasons as the earth revolves around the sun, the earth’s axis remains pointed at the same point in the sky. currently that point is very close to the star polaris in ursa minor. this means that some of the time the axis is tilted in the direction of the sun, and sometimes it is tilted away from the sun. (figure 26) when your hemisphere is pointing towards the sun, you experience summer. when your hemisphere is pointing away from the sun, you experience winter. on the earth’s equator, this means sometimes the sun is north of an observer and sometimes the sun is to the south. throughout the year though, the sun is close to overhead and the amount of sunlight reaching the ground is constant throughout the year. as the latitude of an observer increases and moves away from the equator, the changes are more significant. light rays from the sun are more concentrated when the sun is higher in the sky and they are spread over a larger area when the sun is lower in the sky.
(figure 27) the summer solstice is the time of year when the sun is at the highest point north of the equator. the winter solstice is the time when the sun is at the lowest point south of the equator. the vernal equinox and the autumnal equinox are the two times when the sun crosses the equator. figure 26: the earth’s axial tilt as it orbits the sun figure 27: concentration of sunlight [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page37_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page37_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 38 the moon’s phases: 1. new moon 2. waxing crescent moon 3. first quarter moon 4. waxing gibbous moon 5. full moon 6. waning gibbous moon 7. third quarter moon 8. waning crescent moon component 10 – lunar phases each synodic month, the moon orbits the earth. sometimes it is between the earth and the sun, and sometimes it is on the opposite side of the earth from the sun.