today, all these objects are referred to as quasi-stellar objects (qsos), or, as they are more popularly known, quasars. (the name was also soon appropriated by a manufacturer of home electronics.) read an interview (https://openstax.org/l/30schmidtintv) with maarten schmidt on the fiftieth anniversary of his insight about the spectrum of quasars and their redshifts. over a million quasars have now been discovered, and spectra are available for over a hundred thousand. all these spectra show redshifts, none show blueshifts, and their redshifts can be very large. yet in a photo they look just like stars (figure 27.4). link to learning 27.1 • quasars 929 [image: astronomy_openstax_page947_img1.jpeg] figure 27.4 typical quasar imaged by the hubble space telescope. one of these two bright “stars” in the middle is in our galaxy, while the other is a quasar 9 billion light-years away. from this picture alone, there’s no way to say which is which.
(the quasar is the one in the center of the picture.) (credit: charles steidel (cit)/nasa/esa) in the record-holding quasars, the first lyman series line of hydrogen, with a laboratory wavelength of 121.5 nanometers in the ultraviolet portion of the spectrum, is shifted all the way through the visible region to the infrared. at such high redshifts, the simple formula for converting a doppler shift to speed (radiation and spectra) must be modified to take into account the effects of the theory of relativity. if we apply the relativistic form of the doppler shift formula, we find that these redshifts correspond to velocities of about 96% of the speed of light. e x a m p l e 2 7. 1 recession speed of a quasar the formula for the doppler shift, which astronomers denote by the letters z, is where λ is the wavelength emitted by a source of radiation that is not moving, δλ is the difference between that wavelength and the wavelength we measure, v is the speed with which the source moves away, and c (as usual) is the speed of light.
a line in the spectrum of a galaxy is at a wavelength of 393 nanometers (nm, or 10–9 m) when the source is at rest. let’s say the line is measured to be longer than this value (redshifted) by 7.86 nm. then its redshift , so its speed away from us is 2% of the speed of light this formula is fine for galaxies that are relatively nearby and are moving away from us slowly in the expansion of the universe. but the quasars and distant galaxies we discuss in this chapter are moving away at speeds close to the speed of light. in that case, converting a doppler shift (redshift) to a distance must include the effects of the special theory of relativity, which explains how measurements of space and time change when we see things moving at high speeds. the details of how this is done are way beyond the level of this text, but we can share with you the relativistic formula for the doppler shift: 930 27 • active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page948_img1.jpeg] let’s do an example.
suppose a distant quasar has a redshift of 3. at what fraction of the speed of light is the quasar moving away? solution we calculate the following: the quasar is thus receding from us at about 88% the speed of light. check your learning several lines of hydrogen absorption in the visible spectrum have rest wavelengths of 410 nm, 434 nm, 486 nm, and 656 nm. in a spectrum of a distant galaxy, these same lines are observed to have wavelengths of 492 nm, 521 nm, 583 nm, and 787 nm respectively. what is the redshift of this galaxy? what is the recession speed of this galaxy? answer: because this is the same galaxy, we could pick any one of the four wavelengths and calculate how much it has shifted. if we use a rest wavelength of 410 nm and compare it to the shifted wavelength of 492 nm, we see that in the classical view, this galaxy is receding at 20% of the speed of light; however, at 20% of the speed of light, relativistic effects are starting to become important.