the mass lost, 0.02862 u, is 0.71% of the mass of the initial hydrogen. thus, if 1 kilogram of hydrogen is converted into helium, then the mass of the helium is only 0.9929 kilogram, and 0.0071 kilogram of material is converted into energy. the speed of light (c) is 3 × 108 meters per second, so the energy released by the conversion of just 1 kilogram of hydrogen into helium is: this amount, the energy released when a single kilogram (2.2 pounds) of hydrogen undergoes fusion, would supply all the electricity used by the typical u.s. household for roughly 17,000 years. to produce the sun’s luminosity of 4 × 1026 watts, some 600 million tons of hydrogen must be converted into helium each second, of which about 4 million tons are converted from matter into energy. as large as these numbers are, the store of hydrogen (and thus of nuclear energy) in the sun is still more enormous, and can last a long time—billions of years, in fact.
link to learning 16.2 • mass, energy, and the theory of relativity 553 at the temperatures inside the stars with masses smaller than about 1.2 times the mass of our sun (a category that includes the sun itself), most of the energy is produced by the reactions we have just described, and this set of reactions is called the proton-proton chain (or sometimes, the p-p chain). in the proton-proton chain, protons collide directly with other protons to form helium nuclei. in hotter stars, another set of reactions, called the carbon-nitrogen-oxygen (cno) cycle, accomplishes the same net result. in the cno cycle, carbon and hydrogen nuclei collide to initiate a series of reactions that form nitrogen, oxygen, and ultimately, helium. the nitrogen and oxygen nuclei do not survive but interact to form carbon again. therefore, the outcome is the same as in the proton-proton chain: four hydrogen atoms disappear, and in their place, a single helium atom is created. the cno cycle plays only a minor role in the sun but is the main source of energy for stars with masses greater than about the mass of the sun.
so you can see that we have solved the puzzle that so worried scientists at the end of the nineteenth century. the sun can maintain its high temperature and energy output for billions of years through the fusion of the simplest element in the universe, hydrogen. because most of the sun (and the other stars) is made of hydrogen, it is an ideal “fuel” for powering a star. as will be discussed in the following chapters, we can define a star as a ball of gas capable of getting its core hot enough to initiate the fusion of hydrogen. there are balls of gas that lack the mass required to do this (jupiter is a local example); like so many hopefuls in hollywood, they will never be stars. these animations of proton-proton reactions (https://openstax.org/l/30proprorx) show the steps required for fusion of hydrogen into helium in the sun. fusion on earth wouldn’t it be wonderful if we could duplicate the sun’s energy mechanism in a controlled way on earth?
(we have already duplicated it in an uncontrolled way in hydrogen bombs, but we hope our storehouses of these will never be used.) fusion energy would have many advantages: it would use hydrogen (or deuterium, which is heavy hydrogen) as fuel, and there is abundant hydrogen in earth’s lakes and oceans. water is much more evenly distributed around the world than oil or uranium, meaning that a few countries would no longer hold an energy advantage over the others. and unlike fission, which leaves dangerous byproducts, the nuclei that result from fusion are perfectly safe. the problem is that, as we saw, it takes extremely high temperatures for nuclei to overcome their electrical repulsion and undergo fusion. when the first hydrogen bombs were exploded in tests in the 1950s, the “fuses” to get them hot enough were fission bombs. interactions at such temperatures are difficult to sustain and control. to make fusion power on earth, after all, we have to do what the sun does: produce temperatures and pressures high enough to get hydrogen nuclei on intimate terms with one another.