at the time astrology was set up, the zodiac was divided into 12 sectors called signs (figure 2.15), each 30° long. each sign was named after a constellation in the sky through which the sun, moon, and planets were seen to pass—the sign of virgo after the constellation of virgo, for example. figure 2.15 zodiac signs. the signs of the zodiac are shown in a medieval woodcut. when someone today casually asks you your “sign,” they are asking for your “sun sign”—which zodiac sign the sun was in at the moment you were born. however, more than 2000 years have passed since the signs received their names from the constellations. because of precession, the constellations of the zodiac slide westward along the ecliptic, going once around the sky in about 26,000 years. thus, today the real stars have slipped around by about 1/12 of the zodiac—about the width of one sign. in most forms of astrology, however, the signs have remained assigned to the dates of the year they had when astrology was first set up.
this means that the astrological signs and the real constellations are out of step; the sign of aries, for example, now occupies the constellation of pisces. when you look up your sun sign in a newspaper astrology column, the name of the sign associated with your birthday is no longer the name of the constellation in which the sun was actually located when you were born. to know that constellation, you must look for the sign before the one that includes your birthday. 2.3 • astrology and astronomy 51 [image: astronomy_openstax_page69_img1.jpeg] a complete horoscope shows the location of not only the sun, but also the moon and each planet in the sky by indicating its position in the appropriate sign of the zodiac. however, as the celestial sphere turns (owing to the rotation of earth), the entire zodiac moves across the sky to the west, completing a circuit of the heavens each day. thus, the position in the sky (or “house” in astrology) must also be calculated. there are more or less standardized rules for the interpretation of the horoscope, most of which (at least in western schools of astrology) are derived from the tetrabiblos of ptolemy.
each sign, each house, and each planet—the last acting as a center of force—is supposed to be associated with particular matters in a person’s life. the detailed interpretation of a horoscope is a very complicated business, and there are many schools of astrological thought on how it should be done. although some of the rules may be standardized, how each rule is to be weighed and applied is a matter of judgment—and “art.” it also means that it is very difficult to tie down astrology to specific predictions or to get the same predictions from different astrologers. astrology today astrologers today use the same basic principles laid down by ptolemy nearly 2000 years ago. they cast horoscopes (a process much simplified by the development of appropriate computer programs) and suggest interpretations. sun sign astrology (which you read in the newspapers and many magazines) is a recent, simplified variant of natal astrology. although even professional astrologers do not place much trust in such a limited scheme, which tries to fit everyone into just 12 groups, sun sign astrology is taken seriously by many people (perhaps because it is discussed so commonly in the media).
today, we know much more about the nature of the planets as physical bodies, as well as about human genetics, than the ancients could. it is hard to imagine how the positions of the sun, moon, or planets in the sky at the moment of our birth could have anything to do with our personality or future. there are no known forces, not gravity or anything else, that could cause such effects. (for example, a straightforward calculation shows that the gravitational pull of the obstetrician delivering a newborn baby is greater than that of mars.) astrologers thus have to argue there must be unknown forces exerted by the planets that depend on their configurations with respect to one another and that do not vary according to the distance of the planet—forces for which there is no shred of evidence. another curious aspect of astrology is its emphasis on planet configurations at birth. what about the forces that might influence us at conception? isn’t our genetic makeup more important for determining our personality than the circumstances of our birth? would we really be a different person if we had been born a few hours earlier or later, as astrology claims?