light escaping from the vicinity of a massive object is red-shifted. this is known as gravitational redshift. in an effort to escape the gravitational pull, the photons must exert some energy. this energy is lost. since they do not change their velocity, they reduce their frequency since energy is proportional to frequency. (e=hf) from our perspective on earth, time on the object would slow down. to anyone on board the object, time would appear to continue normally. evidence that space is curved astronomers have found evidence that space really is curved. figure 353 is an image that shows arcs of light that are from distant galaxies that are behind the foreground galaxies. this light is being bent by the gravitational fields of the closer galaxies and is called gravitational lensing. another example is shown by figure 355, the einstein cross. this is an image of a foreground galaxy in the center with four images of the same quasar around the edge. these images have the same spectral signature, so must be the same object. figure 354 shows how light from a distant star can be deflected by the gravitational field of the sun.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page307_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 308 figure 353: gravitational lensing figure 355: einstein cross figure 354: starlight deflected by the sun figure 356: mercury’s orbital motion during a total solar eclipse it is possible to see instances of stars that are actually behind the sun. the maximum deflection is 1.75 arc-seconds. this is a tiny amount, but it is detectable using instruments near earth. this was first tested by sir arthur eddington in 1919 on an expedition to the island of principe off the west coast of africa. he was successful in imaging stars from behind the sun as einstein’s theories predicted. relativity also affects the orbits of planets, and mercury, as close is it is to the sun, shows the largest effect. relativity predicts that mercury’s orbit is not truly an ellipse, but actually the orbit itself rotates around the sun. the shift is only 43 arc-seconds per century, but is measurable. relativity is required to predict the movements of mercury.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page308_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page308_img2.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page308_img3.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page308_img4.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 309 figure 357: binary stars there are 3 types of binary star systems: • detached binary • semi-detached binary • contact binary component 138 – binary stars although the sun is not part of a multi-star system, it appears that many stars are. only 15% of the stars in the milky way are single stars. when you have stars in a binary star system, the life cycle for one star is affected by the other star. there are three types of binary star systems: detached binaries (top in figure 357), semi- detached binaries (center), and contact binaries (bottom). detached binary stars detached binaries are two stars that are gravitationally bound to each other. they orbit each other, but both stars are within their roche lobes.
semi-detached binary stars when one of the stars has evolved to the red giant stage, it may exceed its roche lobe. as matter outside the roche lobe rotates into the companion’s roche lobe it can be captured and falls onto the companion’s accretion disk. contact binary stars the third case is when both stars have evolved into the red giant stage. in this situation both stars are exceeding their roche lobes. both stars are sharing matter with the other star. when this occurs the increase or reduction in matter can change the life cycle for the stars. there are some specific situations when this causes some interesting things to happen.