the final version was seen through the press by another young protestant pastor, andreas osiander. de revolutionibus orbium coelestium libri sex (six books on the revolution of the celestial orbs) was published in 1543; legend has it that the first printed copy was seen by copernicus on his death bed. but the 1543 edition was not exactly as he originally intended. unbeknownst to copernicus, osiander included an unsigned preface that stated that the heliocentric system was not to be considered real, but only as a mathematical theory. this may have been a key factor in its not being considered heretical until galileo defended it seven decades later. de revolutionibus was taken seriously by the next generation of mathematicians because of the way in which copernicus made his case. de revolutionibus was written, page by page and section by section, in parallel with ptolemy’s almagest. the next generation of scholars usually studied both systems, literally side-by-side with each other. by 1582, when pope gregory xiii called for calendar reform, de revolutionibus was used for the astronomical portions of that effort.
so what arguments did copernicus make in defense of heliocentrism? most of his arguments involved the need to re-impose the pythagorean/platonic purity that had been degraded, he felt, over the centuries. the equant point, which used equal angles in equal times, clearly did not follow plato’s injunction that only uniform circular motion could be used. copernicus was able to use combinations of eccentrics with epicycles to eliminate equants. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 432 figure 471: de revolution public domain figure 472: copernicus' models public domain copernicus also argued on purely rational grounds that heliocentrism was esthetically more pleasing, because the order of the planets, starting with mercury and ending with saturn, increased their periods of motion around the sun in increasing order: mercury completed one revolution in 88 days, while each of the others’ orbits took increasingly longer times, ending with saturn taking nearly 30 years for one revolution. to copernicus, this increasing time with increasing distance idea resonated very strongly with the pythagorean number ideal. and of course there was the problem of retrograde motion.
the heliocentric model made short work of that: the planets did not actually change direction; it was simply an optical illusion created by the fact that the earth moves, sometimes overtaking and passing the outer planets, and sometimes being overtaken and passed by the inner planets. this may have been his strongest argument. but there were still arguments against heliocentrism, the same arguments that bedeviled aristarchus: theological tradition, aristotle’s physics, and the lack of stellar parallax. osiander’s preface, however, made these arguments moot. if de revolutionibus was just a mathematical tool, and not [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page432_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page432_img2.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page432_img3.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 433 figure 473: tycho's quadrant public domain the model for a real system, then it didn’t matter whether heliocentrism was real or not. what did matter is that the new system was easier to use, and, with more up-to-date observations, it was more accurate.
so copernicus’ worries about ridicule were unfounded. over the next two generations, perhaps only about two dozen scholars mastered his system, and the church, even during this period of the counter-reformation, found no reason to suppress it, or even to consider it controversial in any way. that remained for a later generation of scholars who depended more on actual observations, and combined these with new arguments for a revision of astronomy. problems with aristotle’s world-view tycho brahe (1546-1601), was born into the danish nobility. his early interest in astronomy was natural, since he had no astronomy teachers, and his father actively suppressed tycho’s interest since astronomy had no bearing on the father’s plans for tycho’s future as a statesman. he wanted tycho to study law, and just forget about this astronomy silliness. tycho’s early interest in astronomy seems to have been two-fold: he truly enjoyed observing the heavens, and he developed a life-long interest in astrology and prognostication. a solar eclipse on august 21, 1560, occurred just as predicted by both the almagest and de revolutionibus. the fact that celestial events could be predicted at all amazed the teenage boy.