the formula in this case would be: check your learning in the previous section, we determined the sum of the masses of the two stars in the sirius binary system (sirius and its faint companion) using kepler’s third law to be 3.2 solar masses. using the mass-luminosity relationship, calculate the mass of each individual star. 18.2 • measuring stellar masses 613 [image: astronomy_openstax_page631_img1.jpeg] answer: in appendix j, sirius is listed with a luminosity 23 times that of the sun. this value can be inserted into the mass-luminosity relationship to get the mass of sirius: the mass of the companion star to sirius is then solar mass. notice how good this mass-luminosity relationship is. most stars (see figure 18.9) fall along a line running from the lower-left (low mass, low luminosity) corner of the diagram to the upper-right (high mass, high luminosity) corner. about 90% of all stars obey the mass-luminosity relation. later, we will explore why such a relationship exists and what we can learn from the roughly 10% of stars that “disobey” it.
this visualization (https://openstax.org/l/30starmass) illustrates how all the properties of a star are determined by the mass that the star happened to form with and how these properties change when you change the mass. 18.3 diameters of stars learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: it is easy to measure the diameter of the sun. its angular diameter—that is, its apparent size on the sky—is about 1/2°. if we know the angle the sun takes up in the sky and how far away it is, we can calculate its true (linear) diameter, which is 1.39 million kilometers, or about 109 times the diameter of earth. unfortunately, the sun is the only star whose angular diameter is easily measured. all the other stars are so far away that they look like pinpoints of light through even the largest ground-based telescopes. (they often seem to be bigger, but that is merely distortion introduced by turbulence in earth’s atmosphere.) luckily, there are several techniques that astronomers can use to estimate the sizes of stars.
stars blocked by the moon one technique, which gives very precise diameters but can be used for only a few stars, is to observe the dimming of light that occurs when the moon passes in front of a star. what astronomers measure (with great precision) is the time required for the star’s brightness to drop to zero as the edge of the moon moves across the star’s disk. since we know how rapidly the moon moves in its orbit around earth, it is possible to calculate the angular diameter of the star. if the distance to the star is also known, we can calculate its diameter in kilometers. this method works only for fairly bright stars that happen to lie along the zodiac, where the moon (or, much more rarely, a planet) can pass in front of them as seen from earth. eclipsing binary stars accurate sizes for a large number of stars come from measurements of eclipsing binary star systems, and so we must make a brief detour from our main story to examine this type of star system.
some binary stars are lined up in such a way that, when viewed from earth, each star passes in front of the other during every link to learning describe the methods used to determine star diameters identify the parts of an eclipsing binary star light curve that correspond to the diameters of the individual components 614 18 • the stars: a celestial census access for free at openstax.org revolution (figure 18.10). when one star blocks the light of the other, preventing it from reaching earth, the brightness of the system decreases, and astronomers say that an eclipse has occurred. figure 18.10 light curve of an eclipsing binary. the light curve of an eclipsing binary star system shows how the combined light from both stars changes due to eclipses over the time span of an orbit. this light curve shows the behavior of a hypothetical eclipsing binary star with total eclipses (one star passes directly in front of and behind the other). the numbers indicate parts of the light curve corresponding to various positions of the smaller star in its orbit. in this diagram, we have assumed that the smaller star is also the hotter one so that it emits more flux (energy per second per square meter) than the larger one.