(credit a: modification of work by filip lolić; credit b: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/t. megeath (university of toledo, ohio)) compare this with our own solar neighborhood, where the typical spacing between stars is about 3 light-years. only a small number of stars in the orion cluster can be seen with visible light, but infrared images—which penetrate the dust better—detect the more than 2000 stars that are part of the group (figure 21.5). figure 21.5 central region of the orion nebula. the orion nebula harbors some of the youngest stars in the solar neighborhood. at the heart of the nebula is the trapezium cluster, which includes four very bright stars that provide much of the energy that causes the nebula to glow so brightly. in these images, we see a section of the nebula in (a) visible light and (b) infrared. the four bright stars in the center of the visible-light image are the trapezium stars. notice that most of the stars seen in the infrared are completely hidden by dust in the visible-light image. (credit a: modification of work by nasa, c.r.
o’dell and s.k. wong (rice university); credit b: modification of work by nasa; k.l. luhman (harvard-smithsonian center for astrophysics); and g. schneider, e. young, g. rieke, a. cotera, h. chen, m. rieke, r. thompson (steward observatory, university of arizona)) studies of orion and other star-forming regions show that star formation is not a very efficient process. in the region of the orion nebula, about 1% of the material in the cloud has been turned into stars. that is why we still see a substantial amount of gas and dust near the trapezium stars. the leftover material is eventually heated, either by the radiation and winds from the hot stars that form or by explosions of the most massive stars.
(we will see in later chapters that the most massive stars go through their lives very quickly and end by exploding.) 21.1 • star formation 703 [image: astronomy_openstax_page721_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page721_img2.jpeg] take a journey through the orion nebula (https://openstax.org/l/30orinebula) to view a nice narrated video tour of this region. whether gently or explosively, the material in the neighborhood of the new stars is blown away into interstellar space. older groups or clusters of stars can now be easily observed in visible light because they are no longer shrouded in dust and gas (figure 21.6). figure 21.6 westerlund 2. this young cluster of stars known as westerlund 2 formed within the carina star-forming region about 2 million years ago. stellar winds and pressure produced by the radiation from the hot stars within the cluster are blowing and sculpting the surrounding gas and dust. the nebula still contains many globules of dust. stars are continuing to form within the denser globules and pillars of the nebula.
this hubble space telescope image includes near-infrared exposures of the star cluster and visible-light observations of the surrounding nebula. colors in the nebula are dominated by the red glow of hydrogen gas, and blue-green emissions from glowing oxygen. (credit: nasa, esa, the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura), a. nota (esa/stsci), and the westerlund 2 science team) although we do not know what initially caused stars to begin forming in orion, there is good evidence that the first generation of stars triggered the formation of additional stars, which in turn led to the formation of still more stars (figure 21.7). link to learning 704 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page722_img1.jpeg] figure 21.7 propagating star formation. star formation can move progressively through a molecular cloud. the oldest group of stars lies to the left of the diagram and has expanded because of the motions of individual stars. eventually, the stars in the group will disperse and no longer be recognizable as a cluster. the youngest group of stars lies to the right, next to the molecular cloud.