the finely detailed views of the galaxies, most of them yellow, are in visible and near-infrared light from the hubble space telescope, while the diffuse purple haze shows x-rays as seen by chandra x-ray observatory. the abundant x-rays, the gravitationally lensed images (thin curving arcs) of background galaxies, and the measured velocities of galaxies in the clusters all show that the total mass of abell 1689—most of it dark matter—is about 1015 solar masses. (credit: modification of work by nasa/esa/jpl-caltech/ yale/cnrs) mass-to-light ratio we described the use of the mass-to-light ratio to characterize the matter in galaxies or clusters of galaxies in properties of galaxies. for systems containing mostly old stars, the mass-to-light ratio is typically 10 to 20, where mass and light are measured in units of the sun’s mass and luminosity. a mass-to-light ratio of 100 or more is a signal that a substantial amount of dark matter is present. table 28.1 summarizes the results of measurements of mass-to-light ratios for various classes of objects.
very large mass-to-light ratios are found for all systems of galaxy size and larger, indicating that dark matter is present in all these types of objects. this is why we say that dark matter apparently makes up most of the total mass of the universe. mass-to-light ratios type of object mass-to-light ratio sun 1 matter in vicinity of sun 2 mass in milky way within 80,000 light-years of the center 10 small groups of galaxies 50–150 rich clusters of galaxies 250–300 table 28.1 the clustering of galaxies can be used to derive the total amount of mass in a given region of space, while 28.4 • the challenge of dark matter 987 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1005_img1.jpeg] visible radiation is a good indicator of where the luminous mass is. studies show that the dark matter and luminous matter are very closely associated. the dark matter halos do extend beyond the luminous boundaries of the galaxies that they surround. however, where there are large clusters of galaxies, you will also find large amounts of dark matter. voids in the galaxy distribution are also voids in the distribution of dark matter. what is the dark matter?
how do we go about figuring out what the dark matter consists of? the technique we might use depends on its composition. let’s consider the possibility that some of the dark matter is made up of normal particles: protons, neutrons, and electrons. suppose these particles were assembled into black holes, brown dwarfs, or white dwarfs. if the black holes had no accretion disks, they would be invisible to us. white and brown dwarfs do emit some radiation but have such low luminosities that they cannot be seen at distances greater than a few thousand light-years. we can, however, look for such compact objects because they can act as gravitational lenses. (see the astronomy basics feature box gravitational lensing.) suppose the dark matter in the halo of the milky way were made up of black holes, brown dwarfs, and white dwarfs. these objects have been whimsically dubbed machos (massive compact halo objects). if an invisible macho passes directly between a distant star and earth, it acts as a gravitational lens, focusing the light from the distant star. this causes the star to appear to brighten over a time interval of a few hours to several days before returning to its normal brightness.
since we can’t predict when any given star might brighten this way, we have to monitor huge numbers of stars to catch one in the act. there are not enough astronomers to keep monitoring so many stars, but today’s automated telescopes and computer systems can do it for us. research teams making observations of millions of stars in the nearby galaxy called the large magellanic cloud have reported several examples of the type of brightening expected if machos are present in the halo of the milky way (figure 28.26). however, there are not enough machos in the halo of the milky way to account for the mass of the dark matter in the halo. figure 28.26 large and small magellanic clouds. here, the two small galaxies we call the large magellanic cloud and small 988 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1006_img1.jpeg] magellanic cloud can be seen above the auxiliary telescopes for the very large telescope array on cerro paranal in chile. you can see from the number of stars that are visible that this is a very dark site for doing astronomy. (credit: eso/j.