kirshner (harvard-smithsonian center for astrophysics) and b. sugerman (stsci)) helium fusion lasted only about 1 million years. when the helium was exhausted at the center of the star, the core contracted again, the radius of the surface also decreased, and the star became a blue supergiant with a luminosity still about equal to 100,000 lsun. this is what it still looked like on the outside when, after brief periods of further fusion, it reached the iron crisis we discussed earlier and exploded. some key stages of evolution of the star that became sn 1987a, including the ones following helium exhaustion, are listed in table 23.2. while we don’t expect you to remember these numbers, note the patterns in the table: each stage of evolution happens more quickly than the preceding one, the temperature and pressure in the core increase, and progressively heavier elements are the source of fusion energy. once iron was created, the collapse began. it was a catastrophic collapse, lasting only a few tenths of a second; the speed of infall in the outer portion of the iron core reached 70,000 kilometers per second, about one-fourth the speed of light.
evolution of the star that exploded as sn 1987a phase central temperature (k) central density (g/cm3) time spent in this phase hydrogen fusion 5 years helium fusion 970 106 years carbon fusion 170,000 2000 years neon fusion 6 months oxygen fusion 1 year silicon fusion days core collapse tenths of a second table 23.2 in the meantime, as the core was experiencing its last catastrophe, the outer shells of neon, oxygen, carbon, helium, and hydrogen in the star did not yet know about the collapse. information about the physical movement of different layers travels through a star at the speed of sound and cannot reach the surface in the few tenths of a second required for the core collapse to occur. thus, the surface layers of our star hung briefly suspended, much like a cartoon character who dashes off the edge of a cliff and hangs momentarily in space before realizing that he is no longer held up by anything. the collapse of the core continued until the densities rose to several times that of an atomic nucleus. the resistance to further collapse then became so great that the core rebounded. infalling material ran into the “brick wall” of the rebounding core and was thrown outward with a great shock wave.
neutrinos poured out of the core, helping the shock wave blow the star apart. the shock reached the surface of the star a few hours later, and the star began to brighten into the supernova ian shelton observed in 1987. 794 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org the synthesis of heavy elements the variations in the brightness of sn 1987a in the days and months after its discovery, which are shown in figure 23.13, helped confirm our ideas about heavy element production. in a single day, the star soared in brightness by a factor of about 1000 and became just visible without a telescope. the star then continued to increase slowly in brightness until it was about the same apparent brightness as the stars in the little dipper. up until about day 40 after the outburst, the energy being radiated away was produced by the explosion itself. but then sn 1987a did not continue to fade away, as we might have expected the light from the explosion to do. instead, sn 1987a remained bright as energy from newly created radioactive elements came into play.
figure 23.13 change in the brightness of sn 1987a over time and supernova 1987a observed with the james webb space telescope. (a) note how the rate of decline of the supernova’s light slowed between days 40 and 500. during this time, the brightness was mainly due to the energy emitted by newly formed (and quickly decaying) radioactive elements. remember that magnitudes are a backward measure of brightness: the larger the magnitude, the dimmer the object looks. (b) at the left we see an image of the supernova in 2023, seen with the telescope’s near-infrared camera. you can see ring of material from earlier in the life of the star with which the particles from the explosion are now colliding. it’s an infrared version of figure 23.12. at the bottom right, you see an image in the infrared light of highly ionized argon atoms. you can see a strong signal from the object in the center, which indicates that it is a neutron star, giving off energetic radiation. (credit b: modification of work "argon emission in sn1987a" by nasa, esa, csa, stsci, and c.