we will see in later chapters that even these stable stars, including the sun, are changing as they evolve, but such evolutionary changes are so gradual that, for all intents and purposes, the stars are still in a state of equilibrium at any given time. the mutual gravitational attraction between the masses of various regions within the sun produces tremendous forces that tend to collapse the sun toward its center. yet we know from the history of earth that the sun has been emitting roughly the same amount of energy for billions of years, so clearly it has managed to resist collapse for a very long time. the gravitational forces must therefore be counterbalanced by some other force. that force is due to the pressure of gases within the sun (figure 16.11). calculations show that, in order to exert enough pressure to prevent the sun from collapsing due to the force of gravity, the gases at its center must be maintained at a temperature of 15 million k. think about what this tells us. just from the fact that the sun is not contracting, we can conclude that its temperature must indeed be high enough at the center for protons to undergo fusion.
556 16 • the sun: a nuclear powerhouse access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page574_img1.jpeg] figure 16.11 hydrostatic equilibrium. in the interior of a star, the inward force of gravity is exactly balanced at each point by the outward force of gas pressure. the sun maintains its stability in the following way. if the internal pressure in such a star were not great enough to balance the weight of its outer parts, the star would collapse somewhat, contracting and building up the pressure inside. on the other hand, if the pressure were greater than the weight of the overlying layers, the star would expand, thus decreasing the internal pressure. expansion would stop, and equilibrium would again be reached when the pressure at every internal point equaled the weight of the stellar layers above that point. an analogy is an inflated balloon, which will expand or contract until an equilibrium is reached between the pressure of the air inside and outside. the technical term for this condition is hydrostatic equilibrium. stable stars are all in hydrostatic equilibrium; so are the oceans of earth as well as earth’s atmosphere. the air’s own pressure keeps it from falling to the ground.
the sun is not cooling down as everyone who has ever left a window open on a cold winter night knows, heat always flows from hotter to cooler regions. as energy filters outward toward the surface of a star, it must be flowing from inner, hotter regions. the temperature cannot ordinarily get cooler as we go inward in a star, or energy would flow in and heat up those regions until they were at least as hot as the outer ones. scientists conclude that the temperature is highest at the center of a star, dropping to lower and lower values toward the stellar surface. (the high temperature of the sun’s chromosphere and corona may therefore appear to be a paradox. but remember from the sun: a garden-variety star that these high temperatures are maintained by magnetic effects, which occur in the sun’s atmosphere.) the outward flow of energy through a star robs it of its internal heat, and the star would cool down if that energy were not replaced. similarly, a hot iron begins to cool as soon as it is unplugged from its source of electric energy. therefore, a source of fresh energy must exist within each star. in the sun’s case, we have seen that this energy source is the ongoing fusion of hydrogen to form helium.
heat transfer in a star since the nuclear reactions that generate the sun’s energy occur deep within it, the energy must be transported from the center of the sun to its surface—where we see it in the form of both heat and light. there are three ways in which energy can be transferred from one place to another. in conduction, atoms or molecules pass on their energy by colliding with others nearby. this happens, for example, when the handle of a metal spoon heats up as you stir a cup of hot coffee. in convection, currents of warm material rise, carrying their energy with them to cooler layers. a good example is hot air rising from a fireplace. in radiation, energetic photons move away from hot material and are absorbed by some material to which they convey 16.3 • the solar interior: theory 557 [image: astronomy_openstax_page575_img1.jpeg] some or all of their energy. you can feel this when you put your hand close to the coils of an electric heater, allowing infrared photons to heat up your hand. conduction and convection are both important in the interiors of planets. in stars, which are much more transparent, radiation and convection are important, whereas conduction can usually be ignored.