even the different structures of the galaxy—disk, halo, central bulge—are not so cleanly separated in terms of their locations, ages, and the heavy element content of the stars within them. the exact definition of the galaxy’s disk depends on what objects we use to define it, and, as we saw earlier, it has no sharp boundary. the hottest young stars and their associated gas and dust clouds are mostly in a region about 200 light-years thick. older stars define a thicker disk that is about 2000 light-years thick. halo stars spend most of their time high above or below the disk but pass through it on their highly elliptical orbits and so are sometimes found relatively near the sun. the highest density of stars is found in the central bulge, that bar-shaped inner region of the galaxy. there are a few hot, young stars in the bulge, but most of the bulge stars are more than 10 billion years old. yet unlike the halo stars of similar age, the abundance of heavy elements in the bulge stars is about the same as in the sun. why would that be? astronomers think that star formation in the crowded nuclear bulge occurred very rapidly just after the milky way galaxy formed.
after a few million years, the first generation of massive and short-lived stars then expelled heavy elements in supernova explosions and thereby enriched subsequent generations of stars. thus, even stars that formed in the bulge more than 10 billion years ago started with a good supply of heavy elements. exactly the opposite occurred in the small magellanic cloud, a small galaxy near the milky way, visible from earth’s southern hemisphere. even the youngest stars in this galaxy are deficient in heavy elements. we think this is because the little galaxy is not especially crowded, and star formation has occurred quite slowly. as a result there have been, so far, relatively few supernova explosions. smaller galaxies also have more trouble holding onto the gas expelled by supernova explosions in order to recycle it. low-mass galaxies exert only a modest gravitational force, and the high-speed gas ejected by supernovae can easily escape from them. which elements a star is endowed with thus depends not only on when the star formed in the history of its galaxy, but also on how many stars in its part of the galaxy had already completed their lives by the time the star is ready to form.
25.6 the formation of the galaxy learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: information about stellar populations holds vital clues to how our galaxy was built up over time. the flattened disk shape of the galaxy suggests that it formed through a process similar to the one that leads to the describe the roles played by the collapse of a single cloud and mergers with other galaxies in building the milky way galaxy we see today provide examples of globular clusters and satellite galaxies affected by the milky way’s strong gravity. 25.6 • the formation of the galaxy 885 formation of a protostar (see the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system). building on this idea, astronomers first developed models that assumed the galaxy formed from a single rotating cloud. but, as we shall see, this turns out to be only part of the story. the protogalactic cloud and the monolithic collapse model because the oldest stars—those in the halo and in globular clusters—are distributed in a sphere centered on the nucleus of the galaxy, it makes sense to assume that the protogalactic cloud that gave birth to our galaxy was roughly spherical.
the oldest stars in the halo have ages of 12 to 13 billion years, so we estimate that the formation of the galaxy began about that long ago. (see the chapter on the big bang for other evidence that galaxies in general began forming a little more than 13 billion years ago.) then, just as in the case of star formation, the protogalactic cloud collapsed and formed a thin rotating disk. stars born before the cloud collapsed did not participate in the collapse, but have continued to orbit in the halo to the present day (figure 25.21). figure 25.21 monolithic collapse model for the formation of the galaxy. according to this model, the milky way galaxy initially formed from a rotating cloud of gas that collapsed due to gravity. halo stars and globular clusters either formed prior to the collapse or were formed elsewhere. stars in the disk formed later, when the gas from which they were made was already “contaminated” with heavy elements produced in earlier generations of stars. gravitational forces caused the gas in the thin disk to fragment into clouds or clumps with masses like those of star clusters. these individual clouds then fragmented further to form stars.