if it is water, it requires a continuing source, either from the atmosphere or from springs that tap underground water layers (aquifers.) underground water would be the most exciting possibility, but this explanation seems inconsistent with the fact that many of the dark streaks start at high elevations on the walls of craters. additional evidence that the dark streaks (called by the scientists recurring slope lineae) are caused by water was found in 2015 when spectra were obtained of the dark streaks (figure 10.29). these showed the presence of hydrated salts produced by the evaporation of salty water. if the water is salty, it could remain liquid long enough to flow downstream for distances of a hundred meters or more, before it either evaporates or soaks into the ground. however, this discovery still does not identify the ultimate source of the water. 10.5 • water and life on mars 349 [image: astronomy_openstax_page367_img1.jpeg] figure 10.29 evidence for liquid water on mars. the dark streaks in horowitz crater, which move downslope, have been called recurring slope lineae. the streaks in the center of the image go down the wall of the crater for about a distance of 100 meters.
spectra taken of this region indicate that these are locations where salty liquid water flows on or just below the surface of mars. (the vertical dimension is exaggerated by a factor of 1.5 compared to horizontal dimensions.) (credit: nasa/jpl-caltech/university of arizona) ancient lakes and glaciers the rovers (spirit, opportunity, curiosity, and perseverance) that have operated on the surface of mars have been used to hunt for additional evidence of water. they could not reach the most interesting sites, such as the gullies, which are located on steep slopes. instead, they explored sites that might be dried-out lake beds, dating back to a time when the climate on mars was warmer and the atmosphere thicker—allowing water to be liquid on the surface. spirit was specifically targeted to explore what looked like an ancient lake-bed in gusev crater, with an outflow channel emptying into it. however, when the spacecraft landed, it found that the former lakebed had been covered by thin lava flows, blocking the rover from access to the sedimentary rocks it had hoped to find. however, opportunity had better luck. peering at the walls of a small crater, it detected layered sedimentary rock.
these rocks contained chemical evidence of evaporation, suggesting there had been a shallow salty lake in that location. in these sedimentary rocks were also small spheres that were rich in the mineral hematite, which forms only in watery environments. apparently this very large basin had once been underwater. the small spherical rocks were nicknamed “blueberries” by the science team and the discovery of a whole “berry-bowl” of them was announced in this interesting news release (https://openstax.org/l/30berrybowl) from nasa. the curiosity rover landed inside gale crater, where photos taken from orbit also suggested past water erosion. it discovered numerous sedimentary rocks, some in the form of mudstones from an ancient lakebed; it also found indications of rocks formed by the action of shallow water at the time the sediment formed (figure 10.30). link to learning 350 10 • earthlike planets: venus and mars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page368_img1.jpeg] even today there is evidence of large quantities of ice just below the surface of mars. in the mid-latitudes, high-resolution photos from orbit have revealed glaciers covered with dirt and dust.
in some cliffs, the ice is observed directly (see figure 10.30). perseverance is exploring the 45-km-wide crater jezero, which is a dusty former lakebed and river delta with evidence of large rocks deposited by ancient floods. these glaciers are thought to have formed during warm periods, when the atmospheric pressure was greater and snow and ice could precipitate. they also suggest readily available frozen water that could support future human exploration of the planet. figure 10.30 gale crater and underground ice deposits. (a) this scene, photographed by the curiosity rover, shows an ancient lakebed of cracked mudstones. (b) geologists working with the curiosity rover interpret this image of cross-bedded sandstone in gale crater as evidence of liquid water passing over a loose bed of sediment at the time this rock formed. (c) ice bands a hundred meters tall are visible in blue in a cliff-face on mars, suggesting large deposits of frozen water buried just a few meters below the surface. note that the blue color has been exaggerated in this photo, taken by the mars reconnaissance orbiter spacecraft.