objects like apples at the surface of earth, at a distance of one earth-radius from the center of earth, are observed to accelerate downward at 9.8 meters per second per second . it is this force of gravity on the surface of earth that gives us our sense of weight. unlike your mass, which would remain the same on any planet or moon, your weight depends on the local force of gravity. so you would weigh less on mars and the moon than on earth, even though there is no change in your mass. (which means you would still have to go easy on the desserts in the college cafeteria when you got back!) the moon is 60 earth radii away from the center of earth. if gravity (and the acceleration it causes) gets weaker with distance squared, the acceleration the moon experiences should be a lot less than for the apple. the acceleration should be (or 3600 times less—about ). this is precisely the observed acceleration of the moon in its orbit.
(as we shall see, the moon does not fall to earth with this acceleration, but falls around earth.) imagine the thrill newton must have felt to realize he had discovered, and verified, a law that holds for earth, apples, the moon, and, as far as he knew, everything in the universe. e x a m p l e 3 . 3 calculating weight by what factor would a person’s weight at the surface of earth change if earth had its present mass but eight times its present volume? solution with eight times the volume, earth’s radius would double. this means the gravitational force at the surface would reduce by a factor of , so a person would weigh only one-fourth as much. 3.3 • newton’s universal law of gravitation 81 check your learning by what factor would a person’s weight at the surface of earth change if earth had its present size but only one-third its present mass? answer: with one-third its present mass, the gravitational force at the surface would reduce by a factor of , so a person would weight only one-third as much. gravity is a “built-in” property of mass. whenever there are masses in the universe, they will interact via the force of gravitational attraction.
the more mass there is, the greater the force of attraction. here on earth, the largest concentration of mass is, of course, the planet we stand on, and its pull dominates the gravitational interactions we experience. but everything with mass attracts everything else with mass anywhere in the universe. newton’s law also implies that gravity never becomes zero. it quickly gets weaker with distance, but it continues to act to some degree no matter how far away you get. the pull of the sun is stronger at mercury than at pluto, but it can be felt far beyond pluto, where astronomers have good evidence that it continuously makes enormous numbers of smaller icy bodies move around huge orbits. and the sun’s gravitational pull joins with the pull of billions of others stars to create the gravitational pull of our milky way galaxy. that force, in turn, can make other smaller galaxies orbit around the milky way, and so on. why is it then, you may ask, that the astronauts aboard the space shuttle appear to have no gravitational forces acting on them when we see images on television of the astronauts and objects floating in the spacecraft?
after all, the astronauts in the shuttle are only a few hundred kilometers above the surface of earth, which is not a significant distance compared to the size of earth, so gravity is certainly not a great deal weaker that much farther away. the astronauts feel “weightless” (meaning that they don’t feel the gravitational force acting on them) for the same reason that passengers in an elevator whose cable has broken feel weightless: they are falling (figure 3.9).2 2 in the film apollo 13, the scenes in which the astronauts were “weightless” were actually filmed in a falling airplane. as you might imagine, the plane fell for only short periods before the engines engaged again. 82 3 • orbits and gravity access for free at openstax.org figure 3.9 astronauts in free fall. while in space, astronauts are falling freely, so they experience “weightlessness.” clockwise from top left: tracy caldwell dyson (nasa), naoko yamazaki (jaxa), dorothy metcalf-lindenburger (nasa), and stephanie wilson (nasa).