voyagers in astronomy 26.1 • the discovery of galaxies 899 [image: astronomy_openstax_page917_img1.jpeg] figure 26.3 edwin hubble (1889–1953). edwin hubble established some of the most important ideas in the study of galaxies. the pull of astronomy eventually proved too strong to resist, and so hubble went back to the university of chicago for graduate work. just as he was about to finish his degree and accept an offer to work at the soon-to-be-completed 2.5-meter telescope, the united states entered world war i, and hubble enlisted as an officer. although the war had ended by the time he arrived in europe, he received more officer’s training abroad and enjoyed a brief time of further astronomical study at cambridge before being sent home. in 1919, at age 30, he joined the staff at mount wilson and began working with the world’s largest telescope. ripened by experience, energetic, disciplined, and a skillful observer, hubble soon established some of the most important ideas in modern astronomy.
he showed that other galaxies existed, classified them on the basis of their shapes, found a pattern to their motion (and thus put the notion of an expanding universe on a firm observational footing), and began a lifelong program to study the distribution of galaxies in the universe. although a few others had glimpsed pieces of the puzzle, it was hubble who put it all together and showed that an understanding of the large-scale structure of the universe was feasible. his work brought hubble much renown and many medals, awards, and honorary degrees. as he became better known (he was the first astronomer to appear on the cover of time magazine), he and his wife enjoyed and cultivated friendships with movie stars and writers in southern california. hubble was instrumental (if you’ll pardon the pun) in the planning and building of the 5-meter telescope on palomar mountain, and he had begun to use it for studying galaxies when he passed away from a stroke in 1953. when astronomers built a space telescope that would allow them to extend hubble’s work to distances he could only dream about, it seemed natural to name it in his honor.
it was fitting that observations with the hubble space telescope (and his foundational work on expansion of the universe) contributed to the 2011 nobel prize in physics, given for the discovery that the expansion of the universe is accelerating (a topic we will expand upon in the chapter on the big bang). 900 26 • galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page918_img1.jpeg] 26.2 types of galaxies learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: having established the existence of other galaxies, hubble and others began to observe them more closely—noting their shapes, their contents, and as many other properties as they could measure. this was a daunting task in the 1920s when obtaining a single photograph or spectrum of a galaxy could take a full night of tireless observing. today, larger telescopes and electronic detectors have made this task less difficult, although observing the most distant galaxies (those that show us the universe in its earliest phases) still requires enormous effort. the first step in trying to understand a new type of object is often simply to describe it.
remember, the first step in understanding stellar spectra was simply to sort them according to appearance (see analyzing starlight). as it turns out, the biggest and most luminous galaxies come in one of two basic shapes: either they are flatter and have spiral arms, like our own galaxy, or they appear to be elliptical (blimp- or cigar-shaped). many smaller galaxies, in contrast, have an irregular shape. spiral galaxies our own galaxy and the andromeda galaxy are typical, large spiral galaxies (see figure 26.2). they consist of a central bulge, a halo, a disk, and spiral arms. interstellar material is usually spread throughout the disks of spiral galaxies. bright emission nebulae and hot, young stars are present, especially in the spiral arms, showing that new star formation is still occurring. the disks are often dusty, which is especially noticeable in those systems that we view almost edge on (figure 26.4). figure 26.4 spiral galaxies. (a) the spiral arms of m100, shown here, are bluer than the rest of the galaxy, indicating young, high- mass stars and star-forming regions.