when these electrons return to their normal orbits, they emit photons, which can then escape from the sun (see radiation and spectra). kelvin and helmholtz calculated that a contraction of the sun at a rate of only about 40 meters per year would be enough to produce the amount of energy that it is now radiating. over the span of human history, the decrease in the sun’s size from such a slow contraction would be undetectable. if we assume that the sun began its life as a large, diffuse cloud of gas, then we can calculate how much energy has been radiated by the sun during its entire lifetime as it has contracted from a very large diameter to its present size. the amount of energy is on the order of 1042 joules. since the solar luminosity is watts (joules/second) or about joules per year, contraction could keep the sun shining at its present rate for roughly 100 million years. in the nineteenth century, 100 million years at first seemed plenty long enough, since earth was then widely thought to be much younger than this. but toward the end of that century and into the twentieth, geologists and physicists showed that earth (and, hence, the sun) is actually much older.
contraction therefore cannot be the primary source of solar energy (although, as we shall see in the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system, contraction is an important source of energy for a while in stars that are just being born). scientists were thus confronted with a puzzle of enormous proportions. either an unknown type of energy was responsible for the most important energy source known to humanity, or estimates of the age of 16.1 • sources of sunshine: thermal and gravitational energy 545 [image: astronomy_openstax_page563_img1.jpeg] the solar system (and life on earth) had to be seriously modified. charles darwin, whose theory of evolution required a longer time span than the theories of the sun seemed to permit, was discouraged by these results and continued to worry about them until his death in 1882. it was only in the twentieth century that the true source of the sun’s energy was identified. the two key pieces of information required to solve the puzzle were the structure of the nucleus of the atom and the fact that mass can be converted into energy.
16.2 mass, energy, and the theory of relativity learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: as we have seen, energy cannot be created or destroyed, but only converted from one form to another. one of the remarkable conclusions derived by albert einstein (see albert einstein) when he developed his theory of relativity is that matter can be considered a form of energy too and can be converted into energy. furthermore, energy can also be converted into matter. this seemed to contradict what humans had learned over thousands of years by studying nature. matter is something we can see and touch, whereas energy is something objects have when they do things like move or heat up. the idea that matter or energy can be converted into each other seemed as outrageous as saying you could accelerate a car by turning the bumper into more speed, or that you could create a bigger front seat by slowing down your car. that would be pretty difficult to believe; yet, the universe actually works somewhat like that.
converting matter into energy the remarkable equivalence between matter and energy is given in one of the most famous equations: in this equation, e stands for energy, m stands for mass, and c, the constant that relates the two, is the speed of light . note that mass is a measure of the quantity of matter, so the significance of this equation is that matter can be converted into energy and energy can be converted into matter. let’s compare this equation of converting matter and energy to some common conversion equations that have the same form: just as each conversion formula allows you to calculate the conversion of one thing into another, when we convert matter into energy, we consider how much mass the matter has. the conversion factor in this case turns out not to be either 12 or 100, as in our examples, but another constant quantity: the speed of light squared. note that matter does not have to travel at the speed of light (or the speed of light squared) for this conversion to occur. the factor of c2 is just the number that einstein showed must be used to relate mass and energy. notice that this formula does not tell us how to convert mass into energy, just as the formula for cents does not tell us where to exchange coins for a dollar bill.