the tallest peak in figure 422 represents the ultraviolet absorption line of the original light. the successive lines to its right are the absorption lines created by the dust clouds. the wavelength of the line originally was 122 nm. this effect has also been observed in the spectra of distant quasars this data was collected as part of nasa’s swift gamma ray burst mission. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page342_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 343 *** section vii. astronomy – cosmology [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page343_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 344 component 165 – the cosmological principle cosmological principle from the surveys discussed in component 163, there are some observations and generalizations can be made. there is a cosmological principle that appears to be true in the visible universe. it is composed of two parts: the universe is homogeneous, and the universe is isotropic. homogeneous homogeneous means that on a large scale (cubes 300 mpc on a side) every cube is the same as every other cube.
although differences could be seen on smaller scales, at this large scale the structures seen would be very similar in each cube. there would be filaments and voids. there would be great walls of galaxies. isotropic isotropic means that no matter in which direction you look, you will see the same structure and contents. you would see the same galaxy structures. this assumes that you are beyond the milky way galaxy and other local concentrations. assumptions and conclusions the cosmological principle assumes that the laws of physics are the same everywhere in the universe. it also assumes that directions where we have not completed detailed surveys will extend what we have seen in our surveys. if the universe is homogeneous, then there can be no edges. an edge would be different from the rest of the universe and a large cube containing an edge would be different than other cubes that do not contain an edge. if the universe is isotropic, then there can be no center. a survey of the universe from any place that is not the center would be different from those taken from the center. this would not be isoptropic.
astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 345 figure 423: possible fates - density component 166 – the ultimate fate of the universe one question that astronomers and cosmologists want to answer is, “what is the ultimate fate of the universe?” will the expansion slow down, begin to contract, and will the universe end in a big crunch? will the expansion slow and stop? will the universe expand forever? density of the universe the answer depends on one thing, the density of the universe. if the density is high enough, then gravity will ultimately win, and the universe will collapse. if the density is too low, the universe will continue to expand forever. if the density is at just the right value, the expansion will slow and the universe’s expansion will come to a halt and be stable. this last case is referred to as the critical density. the possible fates of the universe are indicated by the two curves in figure 423. for a low density universe, the red line shows the continued expansion of the universe. for a high density universe, the blue line shows the expansion and eventual collapse of the universe.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page345_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 346 figure 424: an open, closed, or flat universe the expansion of the universe is accelerating we live in a slightly open universe geometry of the universe but, as we see from einstein’s theories, space can be warped by high mass objects. so too, space can be warped by the mass of the universe. a universe that is at the critical density (ω0) is a flat universe or a critical universe. objects in a flat universe will follow newton’s laws and behave as we would expect based on euclidean geometry. as we were taught, a triangle drawn in a flat universe will have angles adding up to 180 °. in two dimensions this is like a flat sheet of paper. but if the universe is a high density universe, then space will be curved and this is called a closed universe. the two dimensional equivalent would be the surface of a sphere such as the earth. a triangle drawn on the surface of a sphere will have angles that total more than 180 ° (see figure 424). to visualize this, start at the north pole. travel south to the equator and turn eastward.