david morrison, nasa (emeritus) and seti institute david morrison received his phd in astronomy from harvard, where he was one of carl sagan’s graduate students. he is a founder of the field of astrobiology and is known for research on small bodies in the solar system (asteroid 2410 morrison is named for him). he spent his early career at university of hawaii’s institute for astronomy, where he was director of the irtf at maunakea observatory. morrison has held senior nasa positions including director of space research at ames research center, chief of the space science division, and founding director of the lunar science institute. he’s been on science teams for the voyager, galileo, and kepler missions, and he received nasa outstanding leadership medals and exceptional achievement medal. his contributions to public understanding of science have been recognized by education prizes from the astronomical society of the pacific, the american astronomical society, and nasa. committed to the struggle against pseudoscience, he serves as contributing editor of skeptical inquirer. sidney c. wolff, noirlab (emerita) after receiving her phd from the uc berkeley, dr.
wolff was involved with the astronomical development of maunakea. in 1984, she became the director of kitt peak national observatory, and was director of national optical astronomy observatory. she led the design and development phases of the gemini observatory and the rubin observatory. most recently, she has worked on plans for user support for the next generation of large ground-based telescopes. dr. wolff has published over ninety refereed papers on star formation and stellar atmospheres. she has served as president of the aas and the asp. her book, the boundless universe: astronomy in the new age of discovery, won the 2016 ippy (independent publisher book awards) silver medal in science. all three senior contributing authors have received the education prize of the american astronomical society and have had an asteroid named after them by the international astronomical union. they have worked together on a series of astronomy textbooks over the past two decades. contributing authors special thanks are due to geoff mathews (foothill college) who has suggested and updated many of the links to online apps that complement and expand the material in this text. john beck, stanford university susan d.
benecchi, planetary science institute john bochanski, rider university howard bond, pennsylvania state university, emeritus, space telescope science institute jennifer carson, occidental college bryan dunne, university of illinois at urbana-champaign martin elvis, harvard-smithsonian center for astrophysics debra fischer, yale university heidi hammel, association of universities for research in astronomy tori hoehler, nasa ames research center douglas ingram, texas christian university steven kawaler, iowa state university lloyd knox, university of california, davis mark krumholz, australian national university james lowenthal, smith college preface 7 geoff mathews, foothill college siobahn morgan, university of northern iowa daniel perley, california institute of technology claire raftery, national solar observatory deborah scherrer, retired, stanford university phillip scherrer, stanford university sanjoy som, blue marble space institute of science, nasa ames research center wes tobin, indiana university east william h.
waller, retired, tufts university, rockport (ma) public schools todd young, wayne state college reviewers elisabeth r. adams, planetary science institute alfred n. alaniz, san antonio college charles allison, texas a&m university–kingsville douglas arion, carthage college timothy barker, wheaton college marshall bartlett, the hockaday school charles benesh, wesleyan college gerald b. cleaver, baylor university kristi concannon, king’s college anthony crider, elon university scott engle, villanova university matthew fillingim, university of california, berkeley robert fisher, university of massachusetts, dartmouth carrie fitzgerald, montgomery college christopher fuse, rollins college shila garg, emeritus, the college of wooster richard gelderman, western kentucky university lee hartman, university of michigan beth hufnagel, anne arundel community college francine jackson, brown university joseph jensen, utah valley university john kielkopf, university of louisville james c.