at the same time, these small, star-like objects (hence “quasi-stellar” and later shortened to “quasars”) were emitting the kinds of [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page472_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 473 figure 513: the horn antenna energies reminiscent of entire galaxies. this quandary was exploited by both the proponents of the big bang and by the adherents of the steady state theory, often in quite ingenious ways. but now that the field of radio astronomy had proven its worth, it had another ace up its sleeve that would prove to be decisive. and it came about completely by accident. in 1964, arno penzias (born 1933) and robert woodrow wilson (born 1936) were physicists working for the bell telephone laboratories on a supersensitive microwave receiver intended for satellite communications. located in rural holmdel, new jersey, measuring a modest 15 meters across and shaped like a horn, their antenna nevertheless had state-of-the-art electronics cooled to near absolute zero.
penzias and wilson had spent a lot of time and effort trying to eliminate all spurious radio sources, including commercial radio and the radio “glow” from new york city. but a nagging persistent hiss kept them from achieving the results they anticipated, so they doggedly tracked down every possible source, including cleaning a layer of pigeon droppings from inside the horn. still, there was a hiss that seemed to have no identifiable source and was constant night or day. at nearby princeton university, astrophysicist robert h. dicke (1916-1997) and his team were preparing to build a similar receiver expressly to detect the remnants of the big bang “explosion.” penzias and wilson got word of this and contacted dicke to see what they had theorized such a signal should look like. they learned that it should be isotropic and correspond to a temperature of about 5°k, which is almost exactly what they were getting (they got 3°k). they suddenly realized that their annoying hiss was actually the faint echo of the big bang.
the discovery of the cosmic microwave background (cmb) convinced the overwhelming majority of astrophysicists that the big bang theory had won the debate over the steady state theory. over the next few decades additional observations of quasars showed that they were not evenly distributed throughout the cosmos, confirming that the past was fundamentally different from the present. the perfect cosmological principle would have to be abandoned. the universe was not eternal. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page473_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 474 epilog it has not been the intention or within the purview of this brief history of astronomy to consider every twist and turn of the historical record. many interesting stories and many key findings have been left out. interested readers are encouraged to discover for themselves other fascinating episodes and people. since world war ii, astronomy has experienced a remarkable transformation not limited to radio astronomy. after the launch of explorer i in early 1958 and the discovery of the van allen radiation belts, a continuous stream of ever more sophisticated spacecraft (including flybys, orbiters, and landers) has demonstrated the advantages of doing astronomy beyond the earth’s pesky atmosphere.
at the same time, a new era of mega-telescopes much larger than mt. palomar’s 200-inch hale reflector have been constructed, employing new detectors and adaptive optics. a whole new zoo of strange and interesting objects has been discovered since the quasars, including pulsars, gamma-ray bursters, and black holes. the nebular hypothesis has been completely re-worked using advances in nuclear physics and computer modeling of accretion disks. nuclear physics itself has become increasingly dependent on astronomy for its theories involving energies well beyond the capabilities of earth-borne particle accelerators. the enterprise of astronomy has itself changed. cutting edge instruments and observing programs are now rarely the result of individuals like percival lowell, or through the contributions of philanthropists like james lick and charles t. yerkes. such resources now come from scientific foundations, university consortia, national governments, and international organizations. professional astronomers find themselves spending as much time writing grant proposals and serving as project managers as they do on their scientific work. at the same time, some of the same advances in computing and imaging have become available to the general public.