in reality, 3.9 billion years ago, the moon received heavy bombardment from debris in the inner solar system. larger pieces of this debris were responsible for creating large and deep craters. these craters filled in with magma seeping up from inside the moon. it then hardened and is the maria we see today. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page153_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 154 figure 131: the apollo landing sites diagram by soefrm only 12 humans have walked on the moon the lighter colored areas are referred to as the highlands. if we assume that craters were created on the moon evenly, then the highlands must be older than the maria because there are far fewer craters on the surface of the maria. there are also two notable craters that are in figure 130 and can be seen with the unaided eyes. in the highlands near the south is the crater copernicus. in the maria farther north is the crater tycho. the apollo landing sites six apollo crews landed on the moon between 1969 and 1972. a total of twelve people have walked on the moon.
their landing sites are shown in figure 131. they brought back many pounds of moon rocks. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page154_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 155 the moon rotates at exactly the same rate as its orbital period: 27.3 days. the same side of the moon always faces earth. figure 132: synchronous orbit the moon’s gravity is decreasing the earth’s rotation. the earth will be tidally locked to the moon. component 50 – tidally locked objects that orbit each other have an effect on each other caused by their gravity. the moon’s gravity is responsible for tides on the earth. but the earth’s gravity also has an effect on the moon. the eventual outcome of these effects is to cause tidally locked objects. synchronous orbit over billions of years the gentle tugs of earth’s gravity have slowed the rotational period of the moon until it is now equal to the orbital period. they are equal to 27.3 days. the moon is in a synchronous orbit around the earth and is tidally locked. very accurate measurements of the distance to the moon indicate that it is still receding at 1.5 inches per year.
most moons in the solar system are in synchronous orbits with their planets. tidal bulge the earth creates a tidal bulge on the moon. the size of this bulge implies that the moon was much closer to the earth in the past. impact on the earth the moon is also imparting gentle tugs on the earth. the moon is smaller than the earth, so the size of the tugs as well as the effects of these tugs is smaller. but they accumulate over billions of years. eventually, this would result in the earth being tidally locked to the moon as well. this means that when this occurs, the moon will be in the same place in the sky all the time. the earth will rotate at the same rate that the moon orbits the earth.