using different eyepieces, we can change the magnification (or size) of the image and also redirect the light to a more accessible location. stars look like points of light, and magnifying them makes little difference, but the image of a planet or a galaxy, which has structure, can often benefit from being magnified. many people, when thinking of a telescope, picture a long tube with a large glass lens at one end. this design, which uses a lens as its main optical element to form an image, as we have been discussing, is known as a refractor (figure 6.5), and a telescope based on this design is called a refracting telescope. galileo’s telescopes were refractors, as are today’s binoculars and field glasses. however, there is a limit to the size of a refracting telescope. the largest one ever built was a 49-inch refractor built for the paris 1900 exposition, and it was dismantled after the exposition. currently, the largest refracting telescope is the 40-inch refractor at yerkes observatory in wisconsin.
6.1 • telescopes 185 [image: astronomy_openstax_page203_img1.jpeg] figure 6.5 refracting and reflecting telescopes. light enters a refracting telescope through a lens at the upper end, which focuses the light near the bottom of the telescope. an eyepiece then magnifies the image so that it can be viewed by the eye, or a detector like a photographic plate can be placed at the focus. the upper end of a reflecting telescope is open, and the light passes through to the mirror located at the bottom of the telescope. the mirror then focuses the light at the top end, where it can be detected. alternatively, as in this sketch, a second mirror may reflect the light to a position outside the telescope structure, where an observer can have easier access to it. professional astronomers’ telescopes are more complicated than this, but they follow the same principles of reflection and refraction. one problem with a refracting telescope is that the light must pass through the lens of a refractor. that means the glass must be perfect all the way through, and it has proven very difficult to make large pieces of glass without flaws and bubbles in them.
also, optical properties of transparent materials change a little bit with the wavelengths (or colors) of light, so there is some additional distortion, known as chromatic aberration. each wavelength focuses at a slightly different spot, causing the image to appear blurry. in addition, since the light must pass through the lens, the lens can only be supported around its edges (just like the frames of our eyeglasses). the force of gravity will cause a large lens to sag and distort the path of the light rays as they pass through it. finally, because the light passes through it, both sides of the lens must be manufactured to precisely the right shape in order to produce a sharp image. a different type of telescope uses a concave primary mirror as its main optical element. the mirror is curved like the inner surface of a sphere, and it reflects light in order to form an image (figure 6.5). telescope mirrors are coated with a shiny metal, usually silver, aluminum, or, occasionally, gold, to make them highly reflective. if the mirror has the correct shape, all parallel rays are reflected back to the same point, the focus of the mirror. thus, images are produced by a mirror exactly as they are by a lens.
telescopes designed with mirrors avoid the problems of refracting telescopes. because the light is reflected from the front surface only, flaws and bubbles within the glass do not affect the path of the light. in a telescope designed with mirrors, only the front surface has to be manufactured to a precise shape, and the mirror can be supported from the back. for these reasons, most astronomical telescopes today (both amateur and professional) use a mirror rather than a lens to form an image; this type of telescope is called a reflecting telescope. the first successful reflecting telescope was built by isaac newton in 1668. in a reflecting telescope, the concave mirror is placed at the bottom of a tube or open framework. the mirror reflects the light back up the tube to form an image near the front end at a location called the prime focus. the image can be observed at the prime focus, or additional mirrors can intercept the light and redirect it to a 186 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page204_img1.jpeg] position where the observer can view it more easily (figure 6.6).