helium, for example, is the second-most abundant element in the sun. helium has two protons in its nucleus instead of the single proton that characterizes hydrogen. in addition, the helium nucleus contains two neutrons, particles with a mass comparable to that of the proton but with no electric charge. moving around this nucleus are two electrons, so the total net charge of the helium atom is also zero (figure 5.16). figure 5.16 helium atom. here we see a schematic diagram of a helium atom in its lowest energy state. two protons are present in the nucleus of all helium atoms. in the most common variety of helium, the nucleus also contains two neutrons, which have nearly the same mass as the proton but carry no charge. two electrons orbit the nucleus. from this description of hydrogen and helium, perhaps you have guessed the pattern for building up all the elements (different types of atoms) that we find in the universe. the type of element is determined by the number of protons in the nucleus of the atom. for example, any atom with six protons is the element carbon, with eight protons is oxygen, with 26 is iron, and with 92 is uranium.
on earth, a typical atom has the same number of electrons as protons, and these electrons follow complex orbital patterns around the nucleus. deep inside stars, however, it is so hot that the electrons get loose from the nucleus and (as we shall see) lead separate yet productive lives. the ratio of neutrons to protons increases as the number of protons increases, but each element is unique. the number of neutrons is not necessarily the same for all atoms of a given element. for example, most hydrogen atoms contain no neutrons at all. there are, however, hydrogen atoms that contain one proton and one neutron, and others that contain one proton and two neutrons. the various types of hydrogen nuclei with different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes of hydrogen (figure 5.17), and all other elements have isotopes as well. you can think of isotopes as siblings in the same element “family”—closely related but with different characteristics and behaviors. figure 5.17 isotopes of hydrogen. a single proton in the nucleus defines the atom to be hydrogen, but there may be zero, one, or two neutrons. the most common isotope of hydrogen is the one with only a single proton and no neutrons.
to explore the structure of atoms, go to the phet build an atom website (https://openstax.org/l/30atombld) link to learning 162 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page180_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page180_img2.jpeg] where you can add protons, neutrons, or electrons to a model and the name of the element you have created will appear. you can also see the net charge, the mass number, whether it is stable or unstable, and whether it is an ion or a neutral atom. the bohr atom rutherford’s model for atoms has one serious problem. maxwell’s theory of electromagnetic radiation says that when electrons change either speed or the direction of motion, they must emit energy. orbiting electrons constantly change their direction of motion, so they should emit a constant stream of energy. applying maxwell’s theory to rutherford’s model, all electrons should spiral into the nucleus of the atom as they lose energy, and this collapse should happen very quickly—in about 10–16 seconds.
it was danish physicist niels bohr (1885–1962) who solved the mystery of how electrons remain in orbit. he was trying to develop a model of the atom that would also explain certain regularities observed in the spectrum of hydrogen. he suggested that the spectrum of hydrogen can be understood if we assume that orbits of only certain sizes are possible for the electron. bohr further assumed that as long as the electron moves in only one of these allowed orbits, it radiates no energy: its energy would change only if it moved from one orbit to another. this suggestion, in the words of science historian abraham pais, was “one of the most audacious hypotheses ever introduced in physics.” if something equivalent were at work in the everyday world, you might find that, as you went for a walk after astronomy class, nature permitted you to walk two steps per minute, five steps per minute, and 12 steps per minute, but no speeds in between. no matter how you tried to move your legs, only certain walking speeds would be permitted. to make things more bizarre, it would take no effort to walk at any one of the allowed speeds, but it would be difficult to change from one speed to another.