[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page366_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 367 to create life, you need: • source materials • an energy source • a medium • agitation figure 443: oceanic hydrothermal vents photo by the us geological survey component 184 – what do you need for life? once we have an understanding of what life is, then we need to try to identify what environmental considerations are necessary for life to evolve. components to create life the source materials, atoms and molecules necessary to create life abound in nature. the atoms and some molecules are created in stars, and in the proper conditions they combine to form more complex molecules. the second consideration is a source of energy. the surface of a planet receives sunlight and the energy associated with it. lightning in the atmosphere would also provide the needed energy. additional energy would have been available from volcanic eruptions and asteroid impacts with the planet. the third consideration is the medium. to enable chemical reactions to take place, the initial molecules and atoms need to be able to come into contact with each other. the easiest way for this to occur is if those materials are suspended in a liquid. on earth, the most common liquid is water.
and the fourth consideration is a force to cause agitation. in the case of the earth, ocean tides are caused by the gravity of the sun and the moon. in areas close to shore, tides would have caused much agitation in the water and provided the environment where more complex molecules could form. but, not only on the surface although the surface of the earth and its shallow ocean areas are well suited for life to evolve and thrive, there are other locations where the needs can be met. figure 443 shows an example of a hydrothermal vent on the floor of the ocean, well away from lightning and sunlight. there is energy and nutrients for life to thrive. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page367_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 368 figure 444: the red rectangle nebula component 185 – sources for the building blocks we have been able to produce some of the building blocks necessary for life in our laboratories, and the raw materials and appropriate environment existed on earth to make complex molecules, the building blocks of life. but there are those who do not believe that there has been enough time for all of the pieces to have been made here on earth. do they exist in space?
could they be formed in space? by studying the spectra of nebulae in space we are able to identify constituents in those dust clouds. in addition to many elements and molecules, some of the more complex molecules have also been identified in those clouds. these are some of the significant events in the search for building blocks of life in space: • the first molecule was identified in 1937. it was the methylidyne radical (ch). since then many more organic molecules have been found. • in 2004, astronomers identified polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (pahs) in nebulae. these are vital components in the formation of the complex molecules needed for life. molecules such as anthracine and pyrine were found in the red rectangle nebula (figure 444). • in 2012 astronomers identified the signature of glycolaldehyde. this is a sugar used to form ribonucleic acid. • in 2015, nasa scientists created the building blocks of dna and rna in the laboratory including uracil, cytosine and thymine. the identification of these molecules in dust clouds means that they do not have to form on planets but may arrive on planets during the process of planets forming from the stellar cloud.
the process of creating life could have been jump- started by dust from space. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page368_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 369 figure 445: panspermia diagram by silver spoon sokpop component 186 – origins in space although we have all the ingredients and a suitable environment on earth for life to evolve and thrive, did it? there is no way to be sure, but there are theories. the most significant one is called panspermia. it is the notion that life could have originated elswhere in the solar system or elsewhere in the galaxy and been transported to the earth as stowaways on comets and asteroids. a fifth century greek philosopher, anaxagoras, was first to propose the idea. in the 1800s and the 1900s some scientists began to consider the theory. in 2009, even stephen hawking acknowledged that this is a real possibility. the life that would be transported in this way would be simple organisms, one-celled life similar to bacteria and viruses. we have life on earth that lives in very hostile environments, which space certainly would be. they are called extremophiles.