both earthly and extraterrestrial sources may have contributed to earth’s early supply of organic molecules, although we have more direct evidence for the latter. it is even conceivable that life itself originated elsewhere and was seeded onto our planet—although this, of course, does not solve the problem of how that life originated to begin with. hydrothermal vents are beginning to seem more likely as early contributors to the organic compounds found on earth. read about hydrothermal vents and watch videos and slideshows on these and other deep- sea wonders at the woods hole oceanographic institution (https://openstax.org/l/30wohooceins) website. try an interactive simulation of hydrothermal-vent circulation at the dive and discover (https://openstax.org/l/30divediscover) website. the origin and early evolution of life the carbon compounds that form the chemical basis of life may be common in the universe, but it is still a giant step from these building blocks to a living cell. even the simplest molecules of the genes (the basic functional units that carry the genetic, or hereditary, material in a cell) contain millions of molecular units, each arranged in a precise sequence.
furthermore, even the most primitive life required two special capabilities: a means of extracting energy from its environment, and a means of encoding and replicating information in order to make faithful copies of itself. biologists today can see ways that either of these capabilities might have formed in a natural environment, but we are still a long way from knowing how the two came together in the first life-forms. we have no solid evidence for the pathway that led to the origin of life on our planet except for whatever early history may be retained in the biochemistry of modern life. indeed, we have very little direct evidence of what earth itself was like during its earliest history—our planet is so effective at resurfacing itself through plate tectonics (see the chapter on earth as a planet) that very few rocks remain from this early period. in the earlier chapter on cratered worlds, you learned that earth was subjected to a heavy bombardment—a period of large impact events—some 3.8 to 4.1 billion years ago. large impacts would have been energetic enough to heat- sterilize the surface layers of earth, so that even if life had begun by this time, it might well have been wiped out.
when the large impacts ceased, the scene was set for a more peaceful environment on our planet. if the oceans of earth contained accumulated organic material from any of the sources already mentioned, the ingredients were available to make living organisms. we do not understand in any detail the sequence of events that led from molecules to biology, but there is fossil evidence of microbial life in 3.5-billion-year-old link to learning 1060 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org rocks, and possible (debated) evidence for life as far back as 3.8 billion years. life as we know it employs two main molecular systems: the functional molecules known as proteins, which carry out the chemical work of the cell, and information-containing molecules of dna (deoxyribonucleic acid) that store information about how to create the cell and its chemical and structural components. the origin of life is sometimes considered a “chicken and egg problem” because, in modern biology, neither of these systems works without the other. it is our proteins that assemble dna strands in the precise order required to store information, but the proteins are created based on information stored in dna. which came first?
some origin of life researchers believe that prebiotic chemistry was based on molecules that could both store information and do the chemical work of the cell. it has been suggested that rna (ribonucleic acid), a molecule that aids in the flow of genetic information from dna to proteins, might have served such a purpose. the idea of an early “rna world” has become increasingly accepted, but a great deal remains to be understood about the origin of life. perhaps the most important innovation in the history of biology, apart from the origin of life itself, was the discovery of the process of photosynthesis, the complex sequence of chemical reactions through which some living things can use sunlight to manufacture products that store energy (such as carbohydrates), releasing oxygen as one by-product. previously, life had to make do with sources of chemical energy available on earth or delivered from space. but the abundant energy available in sunlight could support a larger and more productive biosphere, as well as some biochemical reactions not previously possible for life. one of these was the production of oxygen (as a waste product) from carbon dioxide, and the increase in atmospheric levels of oxygen about 2.4 billion years ago means that oxygen-producing photosynthesis must have emerged and become globally important by this time.