(credit: modification of work by nasa/swift/stefan immler, et al.) to beam or not to beam the enormous distances to these events meant they had to have been astoundingly energetic to appear as bright as they were across such an enormous distance. in fact, they required so much energy that it posed a problem for gamma-ray burst models: if the source was radiating energy in all directions, then the energy released in gamma rays alone during a bright burst (such as the 1999 or 2008 events) would have been equivalent to the energy produced if the entire mass of a sun-like star were suddenly converted into pure radiation. for a source to produce this much energy this quickly (in a burst) is a real challenge. even if the star producing the gamma-ray burst was much more massive than the sun (as is probably the case), there is no known means of converting so much mass into radiation within a matter of seconds. however, there is one way to reduce the power required of the “mechanism” that makes gamma-ray bursts. so far, our discussion has assumed that the source of the gamma rays gives off the same amount of energy in all directions, like an incandescent light bulb.
but as we discuss in pulsars and the discovery of neutron stars, not all sources of radiation in the universe are like this. some produce thin beams of radiation that are concentrated into only one or two directions. a laser pointer and a lighthouse on the ocean are examples of such beamed sources on earth (figure 23.22). if, when a burst occurs, the gamma rays come out in only one or two narrow beams, then our estimates of the luminosity of the source can be reduced, and the bursts may be easier to explain. in that case, however, the beam has to point toward earth for us to be able to see the burst. this, in turn, would imply that for every burst we see from earth, there are probably many others that we never detect because their beams point in other directions. 810 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page828_img1.jpeg] figure 23.22 burst that is beamed. this artist’s conception shows an illustration of one kind of gamma-ray burst.
the collapse of the core of a massive star into a black hole has produced two bright beams of light originating from the star’s poles, which an observer pointed along one of these axes would see as a gamma-ray burst. the hot blue stars and gas clouds in the vicinity are meant to show that the event happened in an active star-forming region. (credit: nasa/swift/mary pat hrybyk-keith and john jones) long-duration gamma-ray bursts: exploding stars after identifying and following large numbers of gamma-ray bursts, astronomers began to piece together clues about what kind of event is thought to be responsible for producing the gamma-ray burst. or, rather, what kind of events, because there are at least two distinct types of gamma-ray bursts. the two—like the different types of supernovae—are produced in completely different ways. observationally, the crucial distinction is how long the burst lasts. astronomers now divide gamma-ray bursts into two categories: short-duration ones (defined as lasting less than 2 seconds, but typically a fraction of a second) and long-duration ones (defined as lasting more than 2 seconds, but typically about a minute). all of the examples we have discussed so far concern the long-duration gamma-ray bursts.
these constitute most of the gamma-ray bursts that our satellites detect, and they are also brighter and easier to pinpoint. many hundreds of long-duration gamma-ray bursts, and the properties of the galaxies in which they occurred, have now been studied in detail. long-duration gamma-ray bursts are universally observed to come from distant galaxies that are still actively making stars. they are usually found to be located in regions of the galaxy with strong star-formation activity (such as spiral arms). recall that the more massive a star is, the less time it spends in each stage of its life. this suggests that the bursts come from a young and short-lived, and therefore massive type of star. furthermore, in several cases when a burst has occurred in a galaxy relatively close to earth (within a few billion light-years), it has been possible to search for a supernova at the same position—and in nearly all of these cases, astronomers have found evidence of a supernova of type ic going off. a type ic is a particular type of supernova, which we did not discuss in the earlier parts of this chapter; these are produced by a massive star that has been stripped of its outer hydrogen layer. however, only a tiny fraction of type ic supernovae produce gamma-ray bursts.