somewhat later, the remaining outer layers were ejected but not in a spherically symmetric way. the dense clouds formed by this late ejection produce the bright inner regions. the hot central star can be seen faintly near the center of the nebulosity. ngc 7027 is about 3000 light-years away in the direction of the constellation of cygnus. (credit a: modification of work by nasa, esa, and the hubble heritage (stsci/aura)-esa/ hubble collaboration; credit b: modification of work by bruce balick (university of washington), vincent icke (leiden university, the netherlands), garrelt mellema (stockholm university), and nasa; credit c: modification of work by nasa, the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura); credit d: modification of work by h. bond (stsci) and nasa) as figure 22.18 shows, sometimes a planetary nebula appears to be a simple ring. others have faint shells surrounding the bright ring, which is evidence that there were multiple episodes of mass loss when the star was a red giant (see image (d) in figure 22.18).
in a few cases, we see two lobes of matter flowing in opposite directions. many astronomers think that a considerable number of planetary nebulae basically consist of the same structure, but that the shape we see depends on the viewing angle (figure 22.19). according to this idea, the dying star is surrounded by a very dense, doughnut-shaped disk of gas. (theorists do not yet have a definite explanation for why the dying star should produce this ring, but many believe that binary stars, which are common, are involved.) 762 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page780_img1.jpeg] figure 22.19 model to explain the different shapes of planetary nebulae. the range of different shapes that we see among planetary nebulae may, in many cases, arise from the same geometric shape, but seen from a variety of viewing directions. the basic shape is a hot central star surrounded by a thick torus (or doughnut-shaped disk) of gas. the star’s wind cannot flow out into space very easily in the direction of the torus, but can escape more freely in the two directions perpendicular to it.
if we view the nebula along the direction of the flow (helix nebula), it will appear nearly circular (like looking directly down into an empty ice-cream cone). if we look along the equator of the torus, we see both outflows and a very elongated shape (hubble 5). current research on planetary nebulae focuses on the reasons for having a torus around the star in the first place. many astronomers suggest that the basic cause may be that many of the central stars are actually close binary stars, rather than single stars. (credit “hubble 5”: modification of work by bruce balick (university of washington), vincent icke (leiden university, the netherlands), garrelt mellema (stockholm university), and nasa/esa; credit “helix”: modification of work by nasa, esa, c.r. o’dell (vanderbilt university), and m. meixner, p. mccullough) as the star continues to lose mass, any less dense gas that leaves the star cannot penetrate the torus, but the gas can flow outward in directions perpendicular to the disk.
if we look perpendicular to the direction of outflow, we see the disk and both of the outward flows. if we look “down the barrel” and into the flows, we see a ring. at intermediate angles, we may see wonderfully complex structures. compare the viewpoints in figure 22.19 with the images in figure 22.18. planetary nebula shells usually expand at speeds of 20–30 km/s, and a typical planetary nebula has a diameter of about 1 light-year. if we assume that the gas shell has expanded at a constant speed, we can calculate that the shells of all the planetary nebulae visible to us were ejected within the past 5,000 years at most. after this amount of time, the shells have expanded so much that they are too thin and tenuous to be seen. that’s a pretty short time that each planetary nebula can be observed (when compared to the whole lifetime of the star). given the number of such nebulae we nevertheless see, we must conclude that a large fraction of all stars evolve through the planetary nebula phase.