more recently, nasa (in partnership with the german aerospace center) constructed a much larger 2.5-meter telescope, called the stratospheric observatory for infrared astronomy (sofia), which flew in a modified boeing 747sp (figure 6.23). list the advantages of making astronomical observations from space explain the importance of the james webb and hubble space telescopes describe some of the major space-based observatories astronomers use 208 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page226_img1.jpeg] figure 6.23 stratospheric observatory for infrared astronomy (sofia). sofia allowed observations to be made above most of earth’s atmospheric water vapor. (credit: nasa) to find out more about sofia, watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/30sofiavid) provided by nasa’s armstrong flight research center. getting even higher and making observations from space itself have important advantages for infrared astronomy. first is the elimination of all interference from the atmosphere. equally important is the opportunity to cool the entire optical system of the instrument in order to nearly eliminate infrared radiation from the telescope itself.
if we tried to cool a telescope within the atmosphere, it would quickly become coated with condensing water vapor and other gases, making it useless. only in the vacuum of space can optical elements be cooled to hundreds of degrees below freezing and still remain operational. the first orbiting infrared observatory, launched in 1983, was the infrared astronomical satellite (iras), built as a joint project by the united states, the netherlands, and britain. iras was equipped with a 0.6-meter telescope cooled to a temperature of less than 10 k. for the first time, the infrared sky could be seen as if it were night, rather than through a bright foreground of atmospheric and telescope emissions. iras carried out a rapid but comprehensive survey of the entire infrared sky over a 10-month period, cataloging about 350,000 sources of infrared radiation. since then, several other infrared telescopes have operated in space with much better sensitivity and resolution due to improvements in infrared detectors. the most powerful of these early infrared telescopes was the 0.85-meter spitzer space telescope, which launched in 2003 and ended operations in 2020.
but, as we shall see later in this chapter, a much larger infrared telescope (the james webb space telescope) has now taken its place. we continue to build larger and more sensitive infrared telescopes in space because they can help us detect the cooler parts of cosmic objects, such as the dust clouds around nurseries of infant stars and the remnants of dying stars, that visible-light images cannot reveal. link to learning 6.5 • observations outside earth’s atmosphere 209 [image: astronomy_openstax_page227_img1.jpeg] figure 6.24 hubble ultra-deep field (hudf). the hubble space telescope has provided an image of a specific region of space built from data collected between september 24, 2003, and january 16, 2004. these data allow us to search for galaxies that existed approximately 13 billion years ago. (credit: modification of work by nasa) hubble space telescope in april 1990, a great leap forward in astronomy was made with the launch of the hubble space telescope (hst). it has a mirror 2.4 meters in diameter and has earned a reputation as one of the most important telescopes in the history of astronomy.
(its aperture was limited by the size of the payload bay in the space shuttle that served as its launch vehicle.) it was named for edwin hubble, the astronomer who discovered the expansion of the universe in the 1920s (whose work we will discuss in the chapters on galaxies). hst is operated jointly by nasa’s goddard space flight center and the space telescope science institute in baltimore. it was the first orbiting observatory designed to be serviced by shuttle astronauts and, over the years since it was launched, they made several visits to improve or replace its initial instruments and to repair some of the systems that operate the spacecraft—though this repair program has now been discontinued, and no more visits or improvements will be made. with the hubble, astronomers have obtained some of the most detailed images of astronomical objects from the solar system outward to the most distant galaxies. among its many great achievements is the hubble ultra-deep field, an image of a small region of the sky observed for almost 100 hours. it contains views of about 10,000 galaxies, some of which formed when the universe was just a few percent of its current age (figure 6.24).