we can summarize this relationship by 622 18 • the stars: a celestial census access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page640_img1.jpeg] saying that hotter stars are more luminous than cooler ones. a number of stars, however, lie above the main sequence on the h–r diagram, in the upper-right region, where stars have low temperature and high luminosity. how can a star be at once cool, meaning each square meter on the star does not put out all that much energy, and yet very luminous? the only way is for the star to be enormous—to have so many square meters on its surface that the total energy output is still large. these stars must be giants or supergiants, the stars of huge diameter we discussed earlier. there are also some stars in the lower-left corner of the diagram, which have high temperature and low luminosity. if they have high surface temperatures, each square meter on that star puts out a lot of energy. how then can the overall star be dim?
it must be that it has a very small total surface area; such stars are known as white dwarfs (white because, at these high temperatures, the colors of the electromagnetic radiation that they emit blend together to make them look bluish-white). we will say more about these puzzling objects in a moment. figure 18.15 is a schematic h–r diagram for a large sample of stars, drawn to make the different types more apparent. figure 18.15 schematic h–r diagram for many stars. ninety percent of all stars on such a diagram fall along a narrow band called the main sequence. a minority of stars are found in the upper right; they are both cool (and hence red) and bright, and must be giants. some stars fall in the lower left of the diagram; they are both hot and dim, and must be white dwarfs. now, think back to our discussion of star surveys. it is difficult to plot an h–r diagram that is truly representative of all stars because most stars are so faint that we cannot see those outside our immediate neighborhood. the stars plotted in figure 18.14 were selected because their distances are known.
this sample omits many intrinsically faint stars that are nearby but have not had their distances measured, so it shows fewer faint main-sequence stars than a “fair” diagram would. to be truly representative of the stellar population, an h–r diagram should be plotted for all stars within a certain distance. unfortunately, our knowledge is reasonably complete only for stars within 10 to 20 light-years of the sun, among which there are no giants or supergiants. still, from many surveys (and more can now be done with new, more powerful telescopes), we estimate that about 90% of the true stars overall (excluding brown dwarfs) in our part of space are main-sequence stars, about 10% are white dwarfs, and fewer than 1% are giants or supergiants. these estimates can be used directly to understand the lives of stars. permit us another quick analogy with people. suppose we survey people just like astronomers survey stars, but we want to focus our attention on the location of young people, ages 6 to 18 years. survey teams fan out and take data about where such youngsters are found at all times during a 24-hour day.
some are found in the local pizza parlor, others are asleep at home, some are at the movies, and many are in school. after surveying a very large number of young people, one of the things that the teams determine is that, averaged over the course of the 24 hours, one-third of all youngsters are found in school. 18.4 • the h–r diagram 623 [image: astronomy_openstax_page641_img1.jpeg] how can they interpret this result? does it mean that two-thirds of students are truants and the remaining one-third spend all their time in school? no, we must bear in mind that the survey teams counted youngsters throughout the full 24-hour day. some survey teams worked at night, when most youngsters were at home asleep, and others worked in the late afternoon, when most youngsters were on their way home from school (and more likely to be enjoying a pizza). if the survey was truly representative, we can conclude, however, that if an average of one-third of all youngsters are found in school, then humans ages 6 to 18 years must spend about one-third of their time in school. we can do something similar for stars.