brown dwarfs are similar to jupiter in radius but have masses from approximately 13 to 80 times larger than the mass of jupiter.2 figure 18.8 brown dwarfs in orion. these images, taken with the hubble space telescope, show the region surrounding the trapezium star cluster inside the star-forming region called the orion nebula. (a) no brown dwarfs are seen in the visible light image, both because they put out very little light in the visible and because they are hidden within the clouds of dust in this region. (b) this image was taken in infrared light, which can make its way to us through the dust. the faintest objects in this image are brown dwarfs with masses between 13 and 80 times the mass of jupiter. (credit a: nasa, c.r. o’dell and s.k. wong (rice university); credit b: nasa; k.l. luhman (harvard-smithsonian center for astrophysics) and g. schneider, e. young, g. rieke, a. cotera, h. chen, m. rieke, r.
thompson (steward observatory)) still-smaller objects with masses less than about 1/100 the mass of the sun (or 10 jupiter masses) are called planets. they may radiate energy produced by the radioactive elements that they contain, and they may also radiate heat generated by slowly compressing under their own weight (a process called gravitational contraction). however, their interiors will never reach temperatures high enough for any nuclear reactions, to take place. jupiter, whose mass is about 1/1000 the mass of the sun, is unquestionably a planet, for example. until the 1990s, we could only detect planets in our own solar system, but now we have thousands of them elsewhere as well. (we will discuss these exciting observations in the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system.) the mass-luminosity relation now that we have measurements of the characteristics of many different types of stars, we can search for relationships among the characteristics. for example, we can ask whether the mass and luminosity of a star are related. it turns out that for most stars, they are: the more massive stars are generally also the more luminous.
this relationship, known as the mass-luminosity relation, is shown graphically in figure 18.9. each point represents a star whose mass and luminosity are both known. the horizontal position on the graph shows the star’s mass, given in units of the sun’s mass, and the vertical position shows its luminosity in units of 2 exactly where to put the dividing line between planets and brown dwarfs is a subject of some debate among astronomers as we write this book (as is, in fact, the exact definition of each of these objects). even those who accept deuterium fusion (see the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system) as the crucial issue for brown dwarfs concede that, depending on the composition of the star and other factors, the lowest mass for such a dwarf could be anywhere from 11 to 16 jupiter masses. 612 18 • the stars: a celestial census access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page630_img1.jpeg] the sun’s luminosity. figure 18.9 mass-luminosity relation. the plotted points show the masses and luminosities of stars. the three points lying below the sequence of points are all white dwarf stars.
we can also say this in mathematical terms. it’s a reasonably good approximation to say that luminosity (expressed in units of the sun’s luminosity) varies as the fourth power of the mass (in units of the sun’s mass). (the symbol ~ means the two quantities are proportional.) if two stars differ in mass by a factor of 2, then the more massive one will be 24, or about 16 times brighter; if one star is 1/3 the mass of another, it will be approximately 81 times less luminous. e x a m p l e 1 8 . 1 calculating the mass from the luminosity of a star the mass-luminosity formula can be rewritten so that a value of mass can be determined if the luminosity is known. solution first, we must get our units right by expressing both the mass and the luminosity of a star in units of the sun’s mass and luminosity: now we can take the 4th root of both sides, which is equivalent to taking both sides to the 1/4 = 0.25 power.