during the years 1911-1913, russell and hertzsprung collaborated to produce the hertzsprung-russell diagram. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page463_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 464 here you can see a graph of luminosity versus surface temperature (and spectral class). what they discovered was the first hint of the story of the birth and death of stars, in other words, stellar evolution. in just a few decades, spectroscopy had completely transformed astronomy. the universe expands physics in the decade 1895-1905 underwent a period of transition so abrupt and transformative that it has sometimes been called the second scientific revolution. x-rays were discovered in 1895, radioactivity in 1896, the electron in 1897, the early quantum theory was proposed in 1900, and the special theory of relativity appeared in 1905. no such revolution occurred, however, where the age and large-scale structure of the universe was concerned. cosmology had changed little since newton’s day. the age of the universe was an unsolved problem. by the end of the 19th century, estimates for the age of the earth varied widely.
geologist charles lyell and biologist charles darwin favored estimates in the hundreds of millions of years. but the physicist william thomson, lord kelvin, using thermodynamics for the time a molten earth would have taken to cool to its current state, estimated that the earth was only 20 million years old. as for the size of the universe, astronomers still believed that the milky way galaxy was the only such structure in existence. the billions of objects that we know today as other galaxies were thought to be curious “spiral nebulae” in our own galaxy. some astronomers had suspicions that they might be extra-galactic, but there was no observable proof to think differently. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 465 figure 505: yerkes observatory photo by yerkes observatory figure 504: parsontown, ireland observatory photo by tpower it is only in retrospect, of course, that we can see this state of affairs as decidedly provincial. what were needed were larger telescopes with greater light-gathering power. the last half of the 19th century had witnessed the fabrication of ever-larger refractor telescopes.
the firm of alvan clark & sons in cambridgeport, massachusetts, were masters of the art of lens-grinding, producing objective lenses for lowell observatory (24-inch), the united states naval observatory (26-inch), lick observatory (36-inch), and yerkes observatory (40-inch) in 1897. but the yerkes observatory lens was so massive it would deform under its own weight. it had to be periodically rotated to ensure that it didn’t sag too far in any one direction. no larger lens has ever been successfully used for astronomy. so by 1897 the state of the art for refracting telescopes had entered a cul-de-sac; the yerkes 40-inch is still the world’s largest refracting telescope. for astronomers to gain more light-gathering power, therefore, the switch to large reflector telescopes was inevitable. reflectors had traditionally been fabricated from speculum metal, as we saw with newton and herschel. the largest telescope of this type was built in 1845 by the 3rd earl of rosse, in parsonstown, ireland, with a speculum mirror measuring 72 inches in diameter.
though it remained in operation until 1890, its effectiveness was limited by its lack of mobility, the rapidity with which the mirror tarnished and needed repolishing, and the fact that parsonstown only averaged about 60 nights per year that were good enough for observing. refractors had distinct advantages over reflectors in that era. overseeing the transition from lenses to mirrors was george ellery hale (1868-1938), son of a wealthy manufacturer in chicago, illinois. hale’s early interests in [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page465_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page465_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 466 figure 506: 60-inch mount wilson telescope photo by heven729 astronomy were encouraged by his father, who bought him an alvan clark refractor that hale used to learn astrophotography and to begin a life-long study of the sun. he attended the massachusetts institute of technology, where, as an undergraduate, he invented the spectroheliograph, a telescope designed specifically to photograph the sun in specific wavelengths of light.