(a) georges lemaitre (right) is seen here with albert einstein in 1932. lemaitre was first to suggest the concept of an expanding universe. (b) humason was hubble’s collaborator on the great task of observing, measuring, and classifying the characteristics of many galaxies. (credit a, b: modification of work by caltech archives) by the late 1920s, humason was collaborating with hubble by photographing the spectra of faint galaxies with the 2.5-meter telescope. (by then, there was no question that the spiral nebulae were in fact galaxies.) hubble had found ways to improve the accuracy of the estimates of distances to spiral galaxies, and he was able to measure much fainter and more distant galaxies than slipher could observe with his much-smaller telescope. when hubble laid his own distance estimates next to measurements of the recession velocities (the speed with which the galaxies were moving away), he found something stunning: there was a relationship between distance and velocity for galaxies. the more distant the galaxy, the faster it was receding from us.
in 1931, hubble and humason jointly published the seminal paper where they compared distances and velocities of remote galaxies moving away from us at speeds as high as 20,000 kilometers per second and were able to show that the recession velocities of galaxies are directly proportional to their distances from us (figure 26.15), just as lemaître had suggested. figure 26.15 hubble’s law. (a) these data show hubble’s original velocity-distance relation, adapted from his 1929 paper in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences. (b) these data show hubble and humason’s velocity-distance relation, adapted from their 1931 paper in the astrophysical journal. the red dots at the lower left are the points in the diagram in the 1929 paper. comparison of the two graphs shows how rapidly the determination of galactic distances and redshifts progressed in the 2 years 26.5 • the expanding universe 915 [image: astronomy_openstax_page933_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page933_img2.jpeg] between these publications. we now know that this relationship holds for every galaxy except a few of the nearest ones.
nearly all of the galaxies that are approaching us turn out to be part of the milky way’s own group of galaxies, which have their own individual motions, just as birds flying in a group may fly in slightly different directions at slightly different speeds even though the entire flock travels through space together. written as a formula, the relationship between velocity and distance is where v is the velocity, d is the distance, and h is a number called the hubble constant. this equation is now known as hubble’s law.1 constants of proportionality mathematical relationships such as hubble’s law are pretty common in life. to take a simple example, suppose your college or university hires you to call rich alumni and ask for donations. you are paid $2.50 for each call; the more calls you can squeeze in between studying astronomy and other courses, the more money you take home. we can set up a formula that connects p, your pay, and n, the number of calls where a is the alumni constant, with a value of $2.50. if you make 20 calls, you will earn $2.50 times 20, or $50. suppose your boss forgets to tell you what you will get paid for each call.
you can calculate the alumni constant that governs your pay by keeping track of how many calls you make and noting your gross pay each week. if you make 100 calls the first week and are paid $250, you can deduce that the constant is $2.50 (in units of dollars per call). hubble, of course, had no “boss” to tell him what his constant would be—he had to calculate its value from the measurements of distance and velocity. astronomers express the value of hubble’s constant in units that relate to how they measure speed and distance for galaxies. in this book, we will use kilometers per second per million light-years as that unit. for many years, estimates of the value of the hubble constant have been in the range of 15 to 30 kilometers per second per million light-years the most recent work appears to be converging on a value near 22 kilometers per second per million light-years if h is 22 kilometers per second per million light-years, a galaxy moves away from us at a speed of 22 kilometers per second for every million light-years of its distance. as an example, a galaxy 100 million light-years away is moving away from us at a speed of 2200 kilometers per second.