the hst’s mirror was ground and polished to a remarkable degree of accuracy. if we were to scale up its 2.4-meter mirror to the size of the entire continental united states, there would be no hill or valley larger than about 6 centimeters in its smooth surface. unfortunately, after it was launched, scientists discovered that the primary mirror had a slight error in its shape, equal to roughly 1/50 the width of a human hair. small as that sounds, it was enough to ensure that much of the light entering the telescope did not come to a clear focus and that all the images were blurry. (in a misplaced effort to save money, a complete test of the optical system had not been carried out before launch, so the error was not discovered until hst was in orbit.) the solution was to do something very similar to what we do for astronomy students with blurry vision: put corrective optics in front of their eyes. in december 1993, in one of the most exciting and difficult space 210 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page228_img1.jpeg] missions ever flown, astronauts captured the orbiting telescope and brought it back into the shuttle payload bay.
there they installed a package containing compensating optics as well as a new, improved camera before releasing hst back into orbit. the telescope now works as it was intended to, and further missions to it were able to install even more advanced instruments to take advantage of its capabilities. james webb space telescope the largest telescope sent into space so far, and one specifically designed to observe infrared radiation from the universe, is the james webb space telescope. (in a departure from the tradition of naming space telescopes after noted astronomers of the past, it is named after a former administrator at nasa.) launched on december 25, 2021, the telescope is now in a stable orbit about 1.5 million km from earth—four times further than the moon. this is a good, cold location for infrared viewing, but a place where no astronauts can currently travel if the facility needs repair. the webb’s 18-segment primary mirror is 6.5 meters in diameter (figure 6.1). a multi-layer shield the size of a tennis court protects it from the heat of the sun and allows its liquid-helium-cooled instruments to gather extremely faint infrared radiation from the universe.
nasa estimates that its resolution (ability to make out small details) would be sufficient to distinguish a u.s. penny held up 40 km (24 miles) away. some of the first images taken with the telescope are shown and explained in figure 6.25. when looking at these and future images from the webb, bear in mind that its instruments are observing infrared radiation, whose different wavelengths are not visible to the human eye, and thus are not assigned colors by our senses. the colors are added by the science team and represent the different infrared channels (wavelengths) that were observed. figure 6.25 first images from the james webb space telescope. bear in mind that these are infrared images, so the colors are assigned by the science team to bring out scientifically interesting details. (a) southern ring nebula. we are looking at a complex series of shells expelled from a dying star, some 2000 light-years away from us. on visible-light images, only one star can be seen in the middle, but in this infrared view, it’s clear that there are two stars in the nebula’s central region.
it is the reddish star to the left which is dying, and responsible for giving off the shells of dusty material we see expanding around it. but the presence of a companion star makes the dying star wobble, explaining some of the spiky, asymmetrical structure in the shells. we’ll be discussing these “death shroud” nebulae in further evolution of stars. (b) stephan’s quintet. about 1000 separate image files were combined into this remarkably detailed portrait of a compact, interacting group of galaxies. actually, only four of the quintet’s galaxies, the ones on the right, move together in space, about 290 million light-years away; the fifth galaxy, the one on the left, is much closer to us, and just happens to line up with the others in the sky. you can see giant, sweeping “tails” made of stars, gas, and dust that are pulled out of the four galaxies by the gravity of their neighbors. as we will see in galaxies, active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes, and the evolution and distribution of galaxies, interactions among galaxies in groups have a strong influence on the shape and structure of the galaxies involved.