also, as we have noted before, kepler was sensitive only to planets with orbital periods less than about 4 years. what we expect from kepler data, then, is evidence of coplanar planetary systems confined to what would be the realm of the terrestrial planets in our solar system. by the end of may 2024, astronomers gathered data on almost 1000 such exoplanet systems. many have only two known planets, but a few have as many as five, and one has eight (the same number of planets as our own solar system). for the most part, these are very compact systems with most of their planets closer to their star than mercury is to the sun. the figure below shows one of the largest exoplanet systems: that of the star called kepler-62 (figure 21.26). our solar system is shown to the same scale, for comparison (note that the kepler-62 planets are drawn with artistic license; we have no detailed images of any exoplanets). 21.5 • exoplanets everywhere: what we are learning 729 figure 21.26 exoplanet system kepler-62, with the solar system shown to the same scale.
the green areas are the “habitable zones,” the range of distance from the star where surface temperatures are likely to be consistent with liquid water. (credit: modification of work by nasa/ames/jpl-caltech) all but one of the planets in the k-62 system are larger than earth. these are super-earths, and one of them (62d) is in the size range of a mini-neptune, where it is likely to be largely gaseous. the smallest planet in this system is about the size of mars. the three inner planets orbit very close to their star, and only the outer two have orbits larger than mercury in our system. the green areas represent each star’s “habitable zone,” which is the distance from the star where we calculate that surface temperatures would be consistent with liquid water. the kepler-62 habitable zone is much smaller than that of the sun because the star is intrinsically fainter. with closely spaced systems like this, the planets can interact gravitationally with each other. the result is that the observed transits occur a few minutes earlier or later than would be predicted from simple orbits.
these gravitational interactions have allowed the kepler scientists to calculate masses for the planets, providing another way to learn about exoplanets. kepler has discovered some interesting and unusual planetary systems. for example, most astronomers expected planets to be limited to single stars. but we have found planets orbiting close double stars, so that the planet would see two suns in its sky, like those of the fictional planet tatooine in the star wars films. at the opposite extreme, planets can orbit one star of a wide, double-star system without major interference from the second star. 21.6 new perspectives on planet formation learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: explain how exoplanet discoveries have revised our understanding of planet formation discuss how planetary systems quite different from our solar system might have come about 730 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page748_img1.jpeg] traditionally, astronomers have assumed that the planets in our solar system formed at about their current distances from the sun and have remained there ever since.
the first step in the formation of a giant planet is to build up a solid core, which happens when planetesimals collide and stick. eventually, this core becomes massive enough to begin sweeping up gaseous material in the disk, thereby building the gas giants jupiter and saturn. how to make a hot jupiter the traditional model for the formation of planets works only if the giant planets are formed far from the central star (about 5–10 au), where the disk is cold enough to have a fairly high density of solid matter needed to make the planet cores. it cannot explain the hot jupiters, which are located very close to their stars where there is no solid matter because it would be completely vaporized. it also cannot explain the elliptical orbits we observe for some exoplanets because the orbit of a protoplanet, whatever its initial shape, will quickly become circular through interactions with the surrounding disk of material and will remain that way as the planet grows by sweeping up additional matter.