fullerene c60 is also known as a “buckyball,” or as its full name, buckminsterfullerene, because of its similarity to the multisided architectural domes designed by american inventor r. buckminster fuller. some interesting interstellar molecules name chemical formula use on earth ammonia nh3 household cleansers formaldehyde h2co embalming fluid acetylene hc2h fuel for a welding torch table 20.1 20.2 • interstellar gas 677 [image: astronomy_openstax_page695_img1.jpeg] some interesting interstellar molecules name chemical formula use on earth acetic acid c2h2o4 the essence of vinegar ethyl alcohol ch3ch2oh end-of-semester parties ethylene glycol hoch2ch2oh antifreeze ingredient benzene c6h6 carbon ring, ingredient in varnishes and dyes table 20.1 the cold interstellar clouds also contain cyanoacetylene (hc3n) and acetaldehyde (ch3cho), generally regarded as starting points for amino acid formation. these are building blocks of proteins, which are among the fundamental chemicals from which living organisms on earth are constructed.
the presence of these organic molecules does not imply that life exists in space, but it does show that the chemical building blocks of life can form under a wide range of conditions in the universe. as we learn more about how complex molecules are produced in interstellar clouds, we gain an increased understanding of the kinds of processes that preceded the beginnings of life on earth billions of years ago. interested in learning more about fullerenes, buckyballs, or buckminsterfullerenes (as they’re called)? watch a brief video from nasa’s jet propulsion laboratory (https://openstax.org/l/30nasajetprop) that explains what they are and illustrates how they were discovered in space. cocktails in space among the molecules astronomers have identified in interstellar clouds is alcohol, which comes in two varieties: methyl (or wood) alcohol and ethyl alcohol (the kind you find in cocktails). ethyl alcohol is a pretty complex molecule, written by chemists as c2h5oh. it is quite plentiful in space (relatively speaking). in clouds where it has been identified, we detect up to one molecule for every m3.
the largest of the clouds (which can be several hundred light-years across) have enough ethyl alcohol to make 1028 fifths of liquor. we need not fear, however, that future interstellar astronauts will become interstellar alcoholics. even if a spaceship were equipped with a giant funnel 1 kilometer across and could scoop it through such a cloud at the speed of light, it would take about a thousand years to gather up enough alcohol for one standard martini. furthermore, the very same clouds also contain water (h2o) molecules. your scoop would gather them up as well, and there are a lot more of them because they are simpler and thus easier to form. for the fun of it, one astronomical paper actually calculated the proof of a typical cloud. proof is the ratio of alcohol to water in a drink, where 0 proof means all water, 100 proof means half alcohol and half water, and 200 proof link to learning making connections 678 20 • between the stars: gas and dust in space access for free at openstax.org means all alcohol. the proof of the interstellar cloud was only 0.2, not enough to qualify as a stiff drink.
20.3 cosmic dust learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: figure 20.9 shows a striking example of what is actually a common sight through large telescopes: a dark region on the sky that appears to be nearly empty of stars. for a long time, astronomers debated whether these dark regions were empty “tunnels” through which we looked beyond the stars of the milky way galaxy into intergalactic space, or clouds of some dark material that blocked the light of the stars beyond. the astronomer william herschel (discoverer of the planet uranus) thought it was the former, once remarking after seeing one, “here truly is a hole in heaven!” however, american astronomer e. e. barnard is generally credited with showing from his extensive series of nebula photographs that the latter interpretation is the correct one (see the feature box on edward emerson barnard). figure 20.9 barnard 68. this object, first catalogued by e. e. barnard, is a dark interstellar cloud.