some of the cosmic rays come to earth from the surface of the sun, but most come from outside the solar system. where do they come from? there is a serious problem in identifying the source of cosmic rays. since light travels in straight lines, we can tell where it comes from simply by looking. cosmic rays are charged particles, and their direction of motion can be changed by magnetic fields. the paths of cosmic rays are curved both by magnetic fields in interstellar space and by earth’s own field. calculations show that low-energy cosmic rays may spiral many times around earth before entering the atmosphere where we can detect them. if an airplane circles an airport many times before landing, it is difficult for an observer to determine the direction from which it originated. so, too, after a cosmic ray circles earth several times, it is impossible to know where its journey began. there are a few clues, however, about where cosmic rays might be generated. we know, for example, that magnetic fields in interstellar space are strong enough to keep all but the most energetic cosmic rays from escaping the galaxy. it therefore seems likely that they are produced somewhere inside the galaxy. the only likely exceptions are those with the very highest energy.
such cosmic rays move so rapidly that they are not significantly influenced by interstellar magnetic fields, and thus, they could escape our galaxy. by analogy, they could escape other galaxies as well, so some of the highest-energy cosmic rays that we detect may have been created in some distant galaxy. still, most cosmic rays must have their source inside the milky way galaxy. we can also estimate how far typical cosmic rays travel before striking earth. the light elements lithium, beryllium, and boron hold the key. since these elements are formed when carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen strike interstellar protons, we can calculate how long, on average, cosmic rays must travel through space in order to experience enough collisions to account for the amount of lithium and the other light elements that they contain. it turns out that the required distance is about 30 times around the galaxy. at speeds near the speed of light, it takes perhaps 3–10 million years for the average cosmic ray to travel this distance. this is only a small fraction of the age of the galaxy or the universe, so cosmic rays must have been created fairly recently on a cosmic timescale.
the best candidates for a source of cosmic rays are the supernova explosions, which mark the violent deaths of some stars (and which we will discuss in the death of stars). the material ejected by the explosion produces a shock wave, which travels through the interstellar medium. charged particles can become trapped, bouncing back and forth across the front of the shock wave many times. with each pass through the shock, the magnetic fields inside it accelerate the particles more and more. eventually, they are traveling at close to the speed of light and can escape from the shock to become cosmic rays. some collapsed stars (including star remnants left over from supernova explosions) may, under the right circumstances, also serve as accelerators of particles. in any case, we again find that the raw material of the galaxy is enriched by the life cycle of stars. in the next section, we will look at this enrichment process in more detail. you can watch a brief video about the calorimetric electron telescope (calet) (https://openstax.org/l/ 30caletvid) mission, a cosmic ray detector at the international space station.
the link takes you to nasa johnson’s “space station live: cosmic ray detector for iss.” link to learning 20.4 • cosmic rays 687 20.5 the life cycle of cosmic material learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: flows of interstellar gas the most important thing to understand about the interstellar medium is that it is not static. interstellar gas orbits through the galaxy, and as it does so, it can become more or less dense, hotter and colder, and change its state of ionization. a particular parcel of gas may be neutral hydrogen at some point, then find itself near a young, hot star and become part of an h ii region. the star may then explode as a supernova, heating the nearby gas up to temperatures of millions of degrees. over millions of years, the gas may cool back down and become neutral again, before it collects into a dense region that gravity gathers into a giant molecular cloud (figure 20.18) figure 20.18 large-scale distribution of interstellar matter. this image is from a computer simulation of the milky way galaxy’s interstellar medium as a whole. the majority of gas, visible in greenish colors, is neutral hydrogen.