but frankly, private philanthropy could not possibly support the full enterprise of scientific research in astronomy. much of our exploration of the universe is financed by federal agencies such as the national science foundation and nasa in the united states, and by similar government agencies in the other countries. in this way, all of us, through a very small share of our tax dollars, are philanthropists for astronomy.
594 17 • analyzing starlight access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page612_img1.jpeg] key terms apparent brightness a measure of the amount of light received by earth from a star or other object—that is, how bright an object appears in the sky, as contrasted with its luminosity brown dwarf an object intermediate in size between a planet and a star; the approximate mass range is from about 1/100 of the mass of the sun up to the lower mass limit for self-sustaining nuclear reactions, which is about 0.075 the mass of the sun; brown dwarfs are capable of deuterium fusion, but not hydrogen fusion color index difference between the magnitudes of a star or other object measured in light of two different spectral regions—for example, blue minus visual (b–v) magnitudes giant a star of exaggerated size with a large, extended photosphere luminosity the rate at which a star or other object emits electromagnetic energy into space; the total power output of an object magnitude an older system of measuring the amount of light we receive from a star or other luminous object; the larger the magnitude, the less radiation we receive from the object proper motion the angular change per year in the direction of a star as seen from the sun radial velocity motion toward or away from the observer; the component of relative velocity that lies in the line of sight space velocity the total (three-dimensional) speed and direction with which an object is moving through space relative to the sun spectral class (or spectral type) the classification of stars according to their temperatures using the characteristics of their spectra; the types are o, b, a, f, g, k, and m with l, t, and y added recently for cooler star-like objects that recent survey have revealed summary 17.1 the brightness of stars the total energy emitted per second by a star is called its luminosity.
how bright a star looks from the perspective of earth is its apparent brightness. the apparent brightness of a star depends on both its luminosity and its distance from earth. thus, the determination of apparent brightness and measurement of the distance to a star provide enough information to calculate its luminosity. the apparent brightnesses of stars are often expressed in terms of magnitudes, which is an old system based on how human vision interprets relative light intensity. 17.2 colors of stars stars have different colors, which are indicators of temperature. the hottest stars tend to appear blue or blue- white, whereas the coolest stars are red. a color index of a star is the difference in the magnitudes measured at any two wavelengths and is one way that astronomers measure and express the temperature of stars. 17.3 the spectra of stars (and brown dwarfs) the differences in the spectra of stars are principally due to differences in temperature, not composition. the spectra of stars are described in terms of spectral classes. in order of decreasing temperature, these spectral classes are o, b, a, f, g, k, m, l, t, and y. these are further divided into subclasses numbered from 0 to 9.
the classes l, t, and y have been added recently to describe newly discovered star-like objects—mainly brown dwarfs—that are cooler than m9. our sun has spectral type g2. 17.4 using spectra to measure stellar radius, composition, and motion spectra of stars of the same temperature but different atmospheric pressures have subtle differences, so spectra can be used to determine whether a star has a large radius and low atmospheric pressure (a giant star) or a small radius and high atmospheric pressure. stellar spectra can also be used to determine the 17 • key terms 595 chemical composition of stars; hydrogen and helium make up most of the mass of all stars. measurements of line shifts produced by the doppler effect indicate the radial velocity of a star. broadening of spectral lines by the doppler effect is a measure of rotational velocity. a star can also show proper motion, due to the component of a star’s space velocity across the line of sight. for further exploration articles becker, b. “how william huggins shaped astrophysics.” astronomy (september 2018): 44. on how he used spectroscopy and the doppler effect to determine motions of stars. berman, b.