an intriguing science fiction novel he wrote, titled contact, which became a successful film as well, is still recommended by many science instructors as a scenario for making contact with life elsewhere that is much more reasonable than most science fiction. sagan was a master, too, of the television medium. his 13-part public television series, cosmos, was seen by an estimated 500 million people in 60 countries and has become one of the most-watched series in the history of public broadcasting. a few astronomers scoffed at a scientist who spent so much time in the public eye, but it is probably fair to say that sagan’s enthusiasm and skill as an explainer won more friends for the science of astronomy than anyone or anything else in the second half of the twentieth century. 234 7 • other worlds: an introduction to the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page252_img1.jpeg] in the two decades since sagan’s death, no other scientist has achieved the same level of public recognition. perhaps closest is the director of the hayden planetarium, neil degrasse tyson, who followed in sagan’s footsteps by making an updated version of the cosmos program in 2014.
tyson is quick to point out that sagan was his inspiration to become a scientist, telling how sagan invited him to visit for a day at cornell when he was a high school student looking for a career. however, the media environment has fragmented a great deal since sagan’s time. it is interesting to speculate whether sagan could have adapted his communication style to the world of cable television, twitter, facebook, and podcasts. two imaginative videos provide a tour of the solar system objects we have been discussing. shane gellert’s i need some space (https://openstax.org/l/30needsomespace) uses nasa photography and models to show the various worlds with which we share our system. in the more science fiction-oriented wanderers (https://openstax.org/l/30wanderers) video, we see some of the planets and moons as tourist destinations for future explorers, with commentary taken from recordings by carl sagan. a scale model of the solar system astronomy often deals with dimensions and distances that far exceed our ordinary experience. what does 1.4 billion kilometers—the distance from the sun to saturn—really mean to anyone? it can be helpful to visualize such large systems in terms of a scale model.
in our imaginations, let us build a scale model of the solar system, adopting a scale factor of 1 billion (109)—that is, reducing the actual solar system by dividing every dimension by a factor of 109. earth, then, has a diameter of 1.3 centimeters, about the size of a grape. the moon is a pea orbiting this at a distance of 40 centimeters, or a little more than a foot away. the earth-moon system fits into a standard backpack. in this model, the sun is nearly 1.5 meters in diameter, about the average height of an adult, and our earth is at a distance of 150 meters—about one city block—from the sun. jupiter is five blocks away from the sun, and its diameter is 15 centimeters, about the size of a very large grapefruit. saturn is 10 blocks from the sun; uranus, 20 blocks; and neptune, 30 blocks. pluto, with a distance that varies quite a bit during its 249-year orbit, is currently just beyond 30 blocks and getting farther with time.
most of the moons of the outer solar system are the sizes of various kinds of seeds orbiting the grapefruit, oranges, and lemons that represent the outer planets. in our scale model, a human is reduced to the dimensions of a single atom, and cars and spacecraft to the size of molecules. sending the voyager spacecraft to neptune involves navigating a single molecule from the earth–grape toward a lemon 5 kilometers away with an accuracy equivalent to the width of a thread in a spider’s web. if that model represents the solar system, where would the nearest stars be? if we keep the same scale, the closest stars would be tens of thousands of kilometers away. if you built this scale model in the city where you live, you would have to place the representations of these stars on the other side of earth or beyond. by the way, model solar systems like the one we just presented have been built in cities throughout the world. in sweden, for example, stockholm’s huge globe arena has become a model for the sun, and pluto is represented by a 12-centimeter sculpture in the small town of delsbo, 300 kilometers away.