the lunar lander and surface rover from the apollo 15 mission are seen in this view of the one place beyond earth that has been explored directly by humans. (credit: modification of work by david r. scott, nasa) describe how the objects in our solar system are identified, explored, and characterized describe the types of small bodies in our solar system, their locations, and how they formed model the solar system with distances from everyday life to better comprehend distances in space 1 the generic term for a group of planets and other bodies circling a star is planetary system. ours is called the solar system because our sun is sometimes called sol. strictly speaking, then, there is only one solar system; planets orbiting other stars are in planetary systems. 226 7 • other worlds: an introduction to the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page244_img1.jpeg] view this gallery of nasa images (https://openstax.org/l/30projapolloarc) that trace the history of the apollo mission.
an inventory the sun, a star that is brighter than about 80% of the stars in the galaxy, is by far the most massive member of the solar system, as shown in table 7.1. it is an enormous ball about 1.4 million kilometers in diameter, with surface layers of incandescent gas and an interior temperature of millions of degrees. the sun will be discussed in later chapters as our first, and best-studied, example of a star. mass of members of the solar system object percentage of total mass of solar system sun 99.80 jupiter 0.10 comets 0.0005–0.03 (estimate) all other planets and dwarf planets 0.04 moons and rings 0.00005 asteroids 0.000002 (estimate) cosmic dust 0.0000001 (estimate) table 7.1 table 7.1 also shows that most of the material of the planets is actually concentrated in the largest one, jupiter, which is more massive than all the rest of the planets combined.
astronomers were able to determine the masses of the planets centuries ago using kepler’s laws of planetary motion and newton’s law of gravity to measure the planets’ gravitational effects on one another or on moons that orbit them (see orbits and gravity). today, we make even more precise measurements of their masses by tracking their gravitational effects on the motion of spacecraft that pass near them. beside earth, five other planets were known to the ancients—mercury, venus, mars, jupiter, and saturn—and two were discovered after the invention of the telescope: uranus and neptune. the eight planets all revolve in the same direction around the sun. they orbit in approximately the same plane, like cars traveling on concentric tracks on a giant, flat racecourse. each planet stays in its own “traffic lane,” following a nearly circular orbit about the sun and obeying the “traffic” laws discovered by galileo, kepler, and newton. besides these planets, we have also been discovering smaller worlds beyond neptune that are called trans-neptunian objects or tnos (see figure 7.3). the first to be found, in 1930, was pluto, but others have been discovered during the twenty-first century.
one of them, eris, is about the same size as pluto and has at least one moon (pluto has five known moons.) the largest tnos are also classed as dwarf planets, as is the largest asteroid, ceres. (dwarf planets will be discussed further in the chapter on rings, moons, and pluto). to date, more than link to learning 7.1 • overview of our planetary system 227 3900 of these tnos have been discovered, and one, called arrokoth, was explored by the new horizons spacecraft. figure 7.3 orbits of the planets. all eight major planets orbit the sun in roughly the same plane. the five currently known dwarf planets are also shown: eris, haumea, pluto, ceres, and makemake. note that pluto’s orbit is not in the plane of the planets. each of the planets and dwarf planets also rotates (spins) about an axis running through it, and in most cases the direction of rotation is the same as the direction of revolution about the sun.