since hydrogen is the most abundant element in stars, this process can maintain the star’s equilibrium for a long time. thus, all stars remain on the main sequence for most of their lives. some astronomers like to call the main-sequence phase the star’s “prolonged adolescence” or “adulthood” (continuing our analogy to the stages in a human life). the left-hand edge of the main-sequence band in the h–r diagram is called the zero-age main sequence (see figure 21.12). we use the term zero-age to mark the time when a star stops contracting, settles onto the main sequence, and begins to fuse hydrogen in its core. the zero-age main sequence is a continuous line in the h–r diagram that shows where stars of different masses but similar chemical composition can be found when they begin to fuse hydrogen. since only 0.7% of the hydrogen used in fusion reactions is converted into energy, fusion does not change the total mass of the star appreciably during this long period. it does, however, change the chemical composition in its central regions where nuclear reactions occur: hydrogen is gradually depleted, and helium accumulates.
this change of composition changes the luminosity, temperature, size, and interior structure of the star. when a star’s luminosity and temperature begin to change, the point that represents the star on the h–r diagram moves away from the zero-age main sequence. calculations show that the temperature and density in the inner region slowly increase as helium accumulates in the center of a star. as the temperature gets hotter, each proton acquires more energy of motion on average; this means it is more likely to interact with other protons, and as a result, the rate of fusion also increases. for the proton-proton cycle described in the sun: a nuclear powerhouse, the rate of fusion goes up roughly as the temperature to the fourth power. if the rate of fusion goes up, the rate at which energy is being generated also increases, and the luminosity of the star gradually rises. initially, however, these changes are small, and stars remain within the main-sequence band on the h–r diagram for most of their lifetimes. e x a m p l e 2 2 . 1 star temperature and rate of fusion if a star’s temperature were to double, by what factor would its rate of fusion increase?
solution since the rate of fusion (like temperature) goes up to the fourth power, it would increase by a factor of 24, or 16 times. explain the zero-age main sequence describe what happens to main-sequence stars of various masses as they exhaust their hydrogen supply 742 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org check your learning if the rate of fusion of a star increased 256 times, by what factor would the temperature increase? answer: the temperature would increase by a factor of 2560.25 (that is, the 4th root of 256), or 4 times. lifetimes on the main sequence how many years a star remains in the main-sequence band depends on its mass. you might think that a more massive star, having more fuel, would last longer, but it’s not that simple. the lifetime of a star in a particular stage of evolution depends on how much nuclear fuel it has and on how quickly it uses up that fuel. (in the same way, how long people can keep spending money depends not only on how much money they have but also on how quickly they spend it.
this is why many lottery winners who go on spending sprees quickly wind up poor again.) in the case of stars, more massive ones use up their fuel much more quickly than stars of low mass. the reason massive stars are such spendthrifts is that, as we saw above, the rate of fusion depends very strongly on the star’s core temperature. and what determines how hot a star’s central regions get? it is the mass of the star—the weight of the overlying layers determines how high the pressure in the core must be: higher mass requires higher pressure to balance it. higher pressure, in turn, is produced by higher temperature. the higher the temperature in the central regions, the faster the star races through its storehouse of central hydrogen. although massive stars have more fuel, they burn it so prodigiously that their lifetimes are much shorter than those of their low-mass counterparts. you can also understand now why the most massive main-sequence stars are also the most luminous. like new rock stars with their first platinum album, they spend their resources at an astounding rate. the main-sequence lifetimes of stars of different masses are listed in table 22.1.