since it lacks the captured wavelengths, this light is now different in color than the sunlight that illuminates it. the blue part of the spring has temperatures too high to allow photosynthetic life (hence the lack of color except that supplied by water itself), but life is still present. here, at nearly boiling temperatures, bacteria use the chemical energy supplied by the combination of hydrogen and other chemicals with oxygen. (credit: modification of work by domenico salvagnin) life in extreme conditions at a chemical level, life consists of many types of molecules that interact with one another to carry out the processes of life. in addition to water, elemental raw materials, and energy, life also needs an environment in which those complicated molecules are stable (don’t break down before they can do their jobs) and their interactions are possible. your own biochemistry works properly only within a very narrow range of about 10 °c in body temperature and two-tenths of a unit in blood ph (ph is a numerical measure of acidity, or the amount of free hydrogen ions). beyond those limits, you are in serious danger. life overall must also have limits to the conditions in which it can properly work but, as we will see, they are much broader than human limits.
the resources that fuel life are distributed across a very wide range of conditions. for example, there is abundant chemical energy to be had in hot springs that are essentially boiling acid (see figure 30.7). this provides ample incentive for evolution to fill as much of that range with life as is biochemically possible. an organism (usually a microbe) that tolerates or even thrives under conditions that most of the life around us would consider hostile, such as very high or low temperature or acidity, is known as an extremophile (where the suffix -phile means “lover of”). let’s have a look at some of the conditions that can challenge life and the organisms that have managed to carve out a niche at the far reaches of possibility. both high and low temperatures can cause a problem for life. as a large organism, you are able to maintain an almost constant body temperature whether it is colder or warmer in the environment around you. but this is not possible at the tiny size of microorganisms; whatever the temperature in the outside world is also the temperature of the microbe, and its biochemistry must be able to function at that temperature.
high temperatures are the enemy of complexity—increasing thermal energy tends to break apart big molecules into smaller and smaller bits, and life needs to stabilize the molecules with stronger bonds and special proteins. but this approach has its limits. nevertheless, as noted earlier, high-temperature environments like hot springs and hydrothermal vents often offer abundant sources of chemical energy and therefore drive the evolution of organisms that can tolerate high temperatures (see figure 30.8); such an organism is called a thermophile. currently, the high temperature record holder is a methane-producing microorganism that can grow at 122 °c, where the pressure also is so high that water still does not boil. that’s amazing when you think about it. we cook our 1064 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1082_img1.jpeg] food—meaning, we alter the chemistry and structure of its biomolecules—by boiling it at a temperature of 100 °c. in fact, food begins to cook at much lower temperatures than this. and yet, there are organisms whose biochemistry remains intact and operates just fine at temperatures 20 degrees higher. figure 30.8 hydrothermal vent on the sea floor.
what appears to be black smoke is actually superheated water filled with minerals of metal sulfide. hydrothermal vent fluid can represent a rich source of chemical energy, and therefore a driver for the evolution of microorganisms that can tolerate high temperatures. bacteria feeding on this chemical energy form the base of a food chain that can support thriving communities of animals—in this case, a dense patch of red and white tubeworms growing around the base of the vent. (credit: modification of work by the university of washington; noaa/oar/oer) cold can also be a problem, in part because it slows down metabolism to very low levels, but also because it can cause physical changes in biomolecules. cell membranes—the molecular envelopes that surround cells and allow their exchange of chemicals with the world outside—are basically made of fatlike molecules. and just as fat congeals when it cools, membranes crystallize, changing how they function in the exchange of materials in and out of the cell. some cold-adapted cells (called psychrophiles) have changed the chemical composition of their membranes in order to cope with this problem; but again, there are limits.