it took until the twentieth century, however, for scientists to invent instruments that permitted them to probe inside an atom and find that it is not, as had been thought, hard and indivisible. instead, the atom is a complex structure composed of still smaller particles. probing the atom the first of these smaller particles was discovered by british physicist james (j. j.) thomson in 1897. named the electron, this particle is negatively charged. (it is the flow of these particles that produces currents of electricity, whether in lightning bolts or in the wires leading to your lamp.) because an atom in its normal state is electrically neutral, each electron in an atom must be balanced by the same amount of positive charge. the next step was to determine where in the atom the positive and negative charges are located. in 1911, british physicist ernest rutherford devised an experiment that provided part of the answer to this question. he bombarded an extremely thin piece of gold foil, only about 400 atoms thick, with a beam of alpha particles (figure 5.14). alpha particles (α particles) are helium atoms that have lost their electrons and thus are positively charged.
most of these particles passed though the gold foil just as if it and the atoms in it were nearly empty space. about 1 in 8000 of the alpha particles, however, completely reversed direction and describe the structure of atoms and the components of nuclei explain the behavior of electrons within atoms and how electrons interact with light to move among energy levels 160 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page178_img1.jpeg] bounced backward from the foil. rutherford wrote, “it was quite the most incredible event that has ever happened to me in my life. it was almost as incredible as if you fired a 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it came back and hit you.” figure 5.14 rutherford’s experiment. (a) when rutherford allowed α particles from a radioactive source to strike a target of gold foil, he found that, although most of them went straight through, some rebounded back in the direction from which they came. (b) from this experiment, he concluded that the atom must be constructed like a miniature solar system, with the positive charge concentrated in the nucleus and the negative charge orbiting in the large volume around the nucleus.
note that this drawing is not to scale; the electron orbits are much larger relative to the size of the nucleus. the only way to account for the particles that reversed direction when they hit the gold foil was to assume that nearly all of the mass, as well as all of the positive charge in each individual gold atom, is concentrated in a tiny center or nucleus. when a positively charged alpha particle strikes a nucleus, it reverses direction, much as a cue ball reverses direction when it strikes another billiard ball. rutherford’s model placed the other type of charge—the negative electrons—in orbit around this nucleus. rutherford’s model required that the electrons be in motion. positive and negative charges attract each other, so stationary electrons would fall into the positive nucleus. also, because both the electrons and the nucleus are extremely small, most of the atom is empty, which is why nearly all of rutherford’s particles were able to pass right through the gold foil without colliding with anything. rutherford’s model was a very successful explanation of the experiments he conducted, although eventually scientists would discover that even the nucleus itself has structure. the atomic nucleus the simplest possible atom (and the most common one in the sun and stars) is hydrogen.
the nucleus of ordinary hydrogen contains a single proton. moving around this proton is a single electron. the mass of an electron is nearly 2000 times smaller than the mass of a proton; the electron carries an amount of charge exactly equal to that of the proton but opposite in sign (figure 5.15). opposite charges attract each other, so it is an electromagnetic force that holds the proton and electron together, just as gravity is the force that keeps planets in orbit around the sun. figure 5.15 hydrogen atom. this is a schematic diagram of a hydrogen atom in its lowest energy state, also called the ground state. the proton and electron have equal but opposite charges, which exert an electromagnetic force that binds the hydrogen atom 5.4 • the structure of the atom 161 [image: astronomy_openstax_page179_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page179_img2.jpeg] together. in the illustration, the size of the particles is exaggerated so that you can see them; they are not to scale. they are also shown much closer than they would actually be as it would take more than an entire page to show their actual distance to scale. there are many other types of atoms in nature.