link to learning 466 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page484_img1.jpeg] key terms asteroid a stony or metallic object orbiting the sun that is smaller than a planet but that shows no evidence of an atmosphere or of other types of activity associated with comets asteroid belt the region of the solar system between the orbits of mars and jupiter in which most asteroids are located; the main belt, where the orbits are generally the most stable, extends from 2.2 to 3.3 au from the sun comet a small body of icy and dusty matter that revolves about the sun; when a comet comes near the sun, some of its material vaporizes, forming a large head of tenuous gas and often a tail kuiper belt a region of space beyond neptune that is dynamically stable (like the asteroid belt); the source region for most short-period comets near-earth asteroid (nea) an earth-approaching asteroid, one whose orbit could bring it on a collision course with our planet near-earth object (neo) a comet or asteroid whose path intersects the orbit of earth nucleus (of a comet) the solid chunk of ice and dust in the head of a comet oort cloud the large spherical region around the sun from which most “new” comets come; a reservoir of objects with aphelia at about 50,000 au tail (of a comet) a tail consisting of two parts: the dust tail is made of dust loosened by the sublimation of ice in a comet that is then pushed by photons from the sun into a curved stream; the ion tail is a stream of ionized particles evaporated from a comet and then swept away from the sun by the solar wind summary 13.1 asteroids the solar system includes many objects that are much smaller than the planets and their larger moons.
the rocky ones are generally called asteroids. ceres is the largest asteroid; about 15 are larger than 250 kilometers and about 100,000 are larger than 1 kilometer. most are in the asteroid belt between mars and jupiter. the presence of asteroid families in the belt indicates that many asteroids are the remnants of ancient collisions and fragmentation. the asteroids include both primitive and differentiated objects. most asteroids are classed as c-type, meaning they are composed of carbonaceous materials. dominating the inner belt are s-type (stony) asteroids, with a few m-type (metallic) ones. we have spacecraft images of several asteroids and returned samples from three asteroids. recent observations have detected a number of asteroid moons, making it possible to measure the masses and densities of the asteroids they orbit. the two largest asteroids, ceres and vesta, have been extensively studied from orbit by the dawn spacecraft. 13.2 asteroids and planetary defense near-earth asteroids (neas), and near-earth objects (neos) in general, are of interest in part because of their potential to hit earth. they are on unstable orbits, and on timescales of 100 million years, they will either impact one of the terrestrial planets or the sun, or be ejected.
most of them probably come from the asteroid belt, but some may be dead comets. nasa’s spaceguard survey has found 95% of the neas larger than 1 kilometer, and none of the ones found so far are on a collision course with earth. scientists are actively working on possible technologies for planetary defense in case any neos are found on a collision course with earth years in advance. for now, the most important task is to continue our surveys, so we can find the next earth impactor before it finds us. 13.3 the “long-haired” comets halley first showed that some comets are on closed orbits and return periodically to swing around the sun. the heart of a comet is its nucleus, a few kilometers in diameter and composed of volatiles (primarily frozen h2o) and solids (including both silicates and carbonaceous materials). whipple first suggested this “dirty snowball” model in 1950; it has been confirmed by spacecraft studies of several comets.