this would explain why mercury and venus never get very far from the sun “like dogs on a leash, sometimes running ahead and sometimes running behind.” he even suggested that the earth rotated on its axis once per day, but this was never widely accepted. but the main contribution of the pythagoreans was to introduce the idea of moving spheres around a fixed earth. the seven planets (the sun and moon were considered planets, “planetoi” – greek for “wanderers” – along with mercury, venus, mars, jupiter, and saturn) were conceived to be embedded in a series of concentric spheres. each sphere was supposed to be made of a pure crystalline material, and the rotation of each sphere around an axis carried its planet around the earth. an eighth, and final, sphere carried the fixed stars. the spheres had to be perfectly transparent so that earthly observers would be able to see more distant planets through the spheres carrying the closer planets. the problem of the planets unfortunately for pythagoras, things just weren’t that simple. one of the later pythagoreans was an aristocrat named plato who founded his school, the academy, at athens in 388 bce.
plato was the first to state the problem of the planets, and he also set the terms for solving it that held for the next 2000 years. the problem of the planets has three components: 1. planetary motions involve changes in speed. 2. planetary motions involve changes in brightness. 3. planetary motions involve changes in direction. a satisfactory solution must account for all three components: it must “save the phenomena.” plato went on to state the rules by which a solution must be found: a successful model would employ only constant speeds (what he called “uniform motion”); and all motions must be [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page420_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 421 figure 457: plato's model daily rotation of sphere winter solstice spring equinox fall equinox summer solstice stars on sphere earth sun (1 revolution per year) moon (1 revolution per month) figure 458: eudoxus’ model p 4 3 2 1 perfectly circular. so how could uniform circular motion solve the problem of the planets, especially since the pythagorean model had already failed at just that?
the platonic 2-sphere model plato was well aware of the shortcomings of the mathematics of his day, so he knew that “uniform circular motion” was as far as their limited mathematics could take them. but if you could combine simple motions in clever ways, it might just be possible to find solutions for more complex problems. plato only sketched out a solution by beginning with his 2-sphere model. the earth is the small sphere at the center, fixed and unmoving. the larger sphere contains the fixed stars, and shows the apparent path of the sun along the ecliptic, which is tilted at an angle of about 23.5 ° to the celestial equator. the large sphere rotates once each day, which accounts for the daily rising and setting of the stars and planets. the planets travel along the ecliptic (the sun and moon are shown here, taking one year, and one month, respectively, to make one revolution around the earth). since plato was not really very interested in mathematical problems (he was much more concerned with philosophy and ethics, like his teacher socrates), he passed these ideas along to his pupil, eudoxus of cnidus.
eudoxus sought to improve on plato’s model by adding more spheres, each with its own axis of rotation, each designed to deal with the problem of the planets. this led to the eudoxan 4-sphere model. the eudoxan 4-sphere model eudoxus came up with a model designed to address all three components of the problem of the planets. each planet had its own set of concentric spheres. if planet p in the diagram is, say, mars, then the outermost sphere [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page421_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page421_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 422 figure 460: aristotle's spheres figure 459: eudoxus’ model p (1) is responsible for the daily 24-hour motion; sphere (2), which revolves in the opposite direction, takes 687days for one rotation, to account for mars’ slow sidereal motion; spheres (3) and (4), which rotate opposite each other, in combination produce retrograde motion, in the form of a figure eight, called a hippopede.