in reaction to these developments, an attitude has evolved where even outlandish ideas in astronomy are taken seriously. given our lack of solid knowledge in extragalactic astronomy, this is probably to be preferred over authoritarianism.”1 that is not to say that astronomers (being human) don’t continue to have prejudices and preferences. for example, a small group of astronomers who thought that the redshifts of quasars were not connected with their distances (which was definitely a minority opinion) often felt excluded from meetings or from access to telescopes in the 1960s and 1970s. it’s not so clear that they actually were excluded, as much as that they felt the very difficult pressure of knowing that most of their colleagues strongly disagreed with them. as it making connections 1 m. schmidt, “the discovery of quasars,” in modern cosmology in retrospect, ed. b. bertotti et al. (cambridge university press, 1990).
942 27 • active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page960_img1.jpeg] turned out, the evidence—which must ultimately decide all scientific questions—was not on their side either. but today, as better instruments bring solutions to some problems and starkly illuminate our ignorance about others, the entire field of astronomy seems more open to discussing unusual ideas. of course, before any hypotheses become accepted, they must be tested—again and again—against the evidence that nature itself reveals. still, the many strange proposals published about what dark matter might be (see the evolution and distribution of galaxies) attest to the new openness that schmidt described. with this black hole model, we have come a long way toward understanding the quasars and active galaxies that seemed very mysterious only a few decades ago. as often happens in astronomy, a combination of better instruments (making better observations) and improved theoretical models enabled us to make significant progress on a puzzling aspect of the cosmos.
27.3 quasars as probes of evolution in the universe learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the quasars’ brilliance and large distance make them ideal probes of the far reaches of the universe and its remote past. recall that when first introducing quasars, we mentioned that they generally tend to be far away. when we see extremely distant objects, we are seeing them as they were long ago. radiation from a quasar 8 billion light-years away is telling us what that quasar and its environment were like 8 billion years ago, much closer to the time that the galaxy that surrounds it first formed. astronomers have now detected light emitted from quasars that were already formed only a few hundred million years after the universe began its expansion 13.8 billion years ago. thus, they give us a remarkable opportunity to learn about the time when large structures were first assembling in the cosmos. the evolution of quasars quasars provide compelling evidence that we live in an evolving universe—one that changes with time. they tell us that astronomers living billions of years ago would have seen a universe that is very different from the universe of today.
counts of the number of quasars at different redshifts (and thus at different times in the evolution of the universe) show us how dramatic these changes are (figure 27.14). we now know that the number of quasars was greatest at the time when the universe was only 20% of its present age. trace the rise and fall of quasars over cosmic time describe some of the ways in which galaxies and black holes influence each other’s growth describe some ways the first black holes may have formed explain why some black holes are not producing quasar emission but rather are quiescent 27.3 • quasars as probes of evolution in the universe 943 figure 27.14 relative number of quasars and rate at which stars formed as a function of the age of the universe. an age of 0 on the plots corresponds to the beginning of the universe; an age of 13.8 corresponds to the present time. both the number of quasars and the rate of star formation were at a peak when the universe was about 20% as old as it is now. as you can see, the drop-off in the numbers of quasars as time gets nearer to the present day is quite abrupt.