link to learning 6.6 • the future of large telescopes 215 [image: astronomy_openstax_page233_img1.jpeg] key terms adaptive optics systems used with telescopes that can compensate for distortions in an image introduced by the atmosphere, thus resulting in sharper images aperture diameter of the primary lens or mirror of a telescope charge-coupled device (ccd) array of high-sensitivity electronic detectors of electromagnetic radiation, used at the focus of a telescope (or camera lens) to record an image or spectrum chromatic aberration distortion that causes an image to appear fuzzy when each wavelength coming into a transparent material focuses at a different spot detector device sensitive to electromagnetic radiation that makes a record of astronomical observations eyepiece magnifying lens used to view the image produced by the objective lens or primary mirror of a telescope focus (of telescope) point where the rays of light converged by a mirror or lens meet interference process in which waves mix together such that their crests and troughs can alternately reinforce and cancel one another interferometer instrument that combines electromagnetic radiation from one or more telescopes to obtain a resolution equivalent to what would be obtained with a single telescope with a diameter equal to the baseline separating the individual separate telescopes interferometer array combination of multiple radio dishes to, in effect, work like a large number of two-dish interferometers prime focus point in a telescope where the objective lens or primary mirror focuses the light radar technique of transmitting radio waves to an object and then detecting the radiation that the object reflects back to the transmitter; used to measure the distance to, and motion of, a target object or to form images of it reflecting telescope telescope in which the principal light collector is a concave mirror refracting telescope telescope in which the principal light collector is a lens or system of lenses resolution detail in an image; specifically, the smallest angular (or linear) features that can be distinguished seeing unsteadiness of earth’s atmosphere, which blurs telescopic images; good seeing means the atmosphere is steady telescope instrument for collecting visible-light or other electromagnetic radiation summary 6.1 telescopes a telescope collects the faint light from astronomical sources and brings it to a focus, where an instrument can sort the light according to wavelength.
light is then directed to a detector, where a permanent record is made. the light-gathering power of a telescope is determined by the diameter of its aperture, or opening—that is, by the area of its largest or primary lens or mirror. the primary optical element in a telescope is either a convex lens (in a refracting telescope) or a concave mirror (in a reflector) that brings the light to a focus. most large telescopes are reflectors; it is easier to manufacture and support large mirrors because the light does not have to pass through glass. 6.2 telescopes today new technologies for creating and supporting lightweight mirrors have led to the construction of a number of large telescopes since 1990. the site for an astronomical observatory must be carefully chosen for clear weather, dark skies, low water vapor, and excellent atmospheric seeing (low atmospheric turbulence). the resolution of a visible-light or infrared telescope is degraded by turbulence in earth’s atmosphere. the technique of adaptive optics, however, can make corrections for this turbulence in real time and produce exquisitely detailed images.
216 6 • key terms access for free at openstax.org 6.3 visible-light detectors and instruments visible-light detectors include the human eye, photographic film, and charge-coupled devices (ccds). detectors that are sensitive to infrared radiation must be cooled to very low temperatures since everything in and near the telescope gives off infrared waves. a spectrometer disperses the light into a spectrum to be recorded for detailed analysis. 6.4 radio telescopes in the 1930s, radio astronomy was pioneered by karl g. jansky and grote reber. a radio telescope is basically a radio antenna (often a large, curved dish) connected to a receiver. significantly enhanced resolution can be obtained with interferometers, including interferometer arrays like the 27-element vla and the 66-element alma. expanding to very long baseline interferometers, radio astronomers can achieve resolutions as precise as 0.0001 arcsecond. radar astronomy involves transmitting as well as receiving. the largest radio telescope dish currently in operation is the 500-meter fast bowl in china." 6.5 observations outside earth’s atmosphere infrared observations are made with telescopes aboard aircraft and in space, as well as from ground-based facilities on dry mountain peaks.