we could think of mercury as a metal ball the size of the moon surrounded by a rocky crust 700 kilometers thick (figure 9.20). unlike the moon, mercury does have a weak magnetic field. the existence of this field is consistent with the presence of a large metal core, and it suggests that at least part of the core must be liquid in order to generate the observed magnetic field.3 characterize the orbit of mercury around the sun describe mercury’s structure and composition explain the relationship between mercury’s orbit and rotation describe the topography and features of mercury’s surface summarize our ideas about the origin and evolution of mercury 3 recall from the radiation and spectra chapter that magnetism is an effect of moving electric charges. in atoms of metals, the outer electrons are easier to dislodge and they can form a current when the metal is in liquid form and can flow. 9.5 • mercury 307 figure 9.20 mercury’s internal structure. the interior of mercury is dominated by a metallic core about the same size as our moon. e x a m p l e 9 . 1 densities of worlds the average density of a body equals its mass divided by its volume.
for a sphere, density is: astronomers can measure both mass and radius accurately when a spacecraft flies by a body. using the information in this chapter, we can calculate the approximate average density of the moon. solution for a sphere, table 9.1 gives a value of , which is . check your learning using the information in this chapter, calculate the average density of mercury. show your work. does your calculation agree with the figure we give in this chapter? answer: that matches the value given in table 9.1 when g/cm3 is converted into kg/m3. mercury’s strange rotation visual studies of mercury’s indistinct surface markings were once thought to indicate that the planet kept one face to the sun (as the moon does to earth). thus, for many years, it was widely believed that mercury’s rotation period was equal to its revolution period of 88 days, making one side perpetually hot while the other 308 9 • cratered worlds access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page326_img1.jpeg] was always cold. radar observations of mercury in the mid-1960s, however, showed conclusively that mercury does not keep one side fixed toward the sun.
if a planet is turning, one side seems to be approaching earth while the other is moving away from it. the resulting doppler shift spreads or broadens the precise transmitted radar-wave frequency into a range of frequencies in the reflected signal (figure 9.21). the degree of broadening provides an exact measurement of the rotation rate of the planet. figure 9.21 doppler radar measures rotation. when a radar beam is reflected from a rotating planet, the motion of one side of the planet’s disk toward us and the other side away from us causes doppler shifts in the reflected signal. the effect is to cause both a redshift and a blueshift, widening the spread of frequencies in the radio beam. mercury’s period of rotation (how long it takes to turn with respect to the distant stars) is 59 days, which is just two-thirds of the planet’s period of revolution. subsequently, astronomers found that a situation where the spin and the orbit of a planet (its year) are in a 2:3 ratio turns out to be stable.
(see what a difference a day makes for more on the effects of having such a long day on mercury.) mercury, being close to the sun, is very hot on its daylight side; but because it has no appreciable atmosphere, it gets surprisingly cold during the long nights. the temperature on the surface climbs to 700 k (430 °c) at noontime. after sunset, however, the temperature drops, reaching 100 k (–170 °c) just before dawn. (it is even colder in craters near the poles that receive no sunlight at all.) the range in temperature on mercury is thus 600 k (or 600 °c), a greater difference than on any other planet. what a difference a day makes mercury rotates three times for each two orbits around the sun. it is the only planet that exhibits this relationship between its spin and its orbit, and there are some interesting consequences for any observers who might someday be stationed on the surface of mercury. here on earth, we take for granted that days are much shorter than years.