evidence that supports this theory is concentrations of gases in the atmosphere of jupiter and saturn that are too high if the planets formed in their current orbits. solar system timeline different amounts of time were required for the different components of the solar system to form. and each component had an ideal time to begin the process. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page122_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 123 figure 160: solar system distances to remember these values, use this technique: • the earth is 1 au. this is the definition of the au. • mercury is roughly 1/3 the distance from the sun to the earth: 1/3 au. • venus is roughly 2/3 the distance from the sun to the earth: 2/3 au. • mars is at 1.5 au. • jupiter is at 5 au. • saturn is at 10 au. • uranus is at 20 au. • neptune is at 30 au, component 39 – comparative planetology humans have a need to compartmentalize the things they see. we need to compare and contrast objects to fully understand how they all fit into the big picture.
one area where this is helpful is in the comparison of the planets. we will explore what they have in common and what characteristics are unique. the scale of the solar system the solar system is a big place. we will focus our attention on the planets. in close to the sun, where the earth is located, things are fairly compact. as you move out to the outer planets, there is a lot of empty space. as figure 160 shows, all of the planets from mercury to jupiter lie within the first 1/6th of the overall distance. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page123_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 124 planetary pecking order another useful way to think about the planets is to think about them by comparing their sizes. some are quite large, some are quite small. planetary uniquenesses each planet has features which make it unique in the solar system. this is also a helpful way to remember details about the planets. • mercury o most eccentric (non-circular) orbit of the planets. o smallest planet and closest to the sun.
• venus o hottest planet o most similar to earth in size and composition o very white due to thick cloud cover o no details on surface of clouds • earth o only planet known to have life o only planet with lots of oxygen in its atmosphere o only planet with constant liquid water on its surface o only planet on which humans have walked • mars o largest volcano in the solar system: olympus mons o largest canyon in the solar system: valles marineris o the red planet • jupiter o the largest planet o distinct bands on surface of clouds o strongest magnetic field: reaches out past the orbit of saturn • saturn o the rings! o the most known moons o the yellow planet • uranus o blue-green planet o magnetic field is off center and far from the rotation axis o no details on surface of planet astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 125 terrestrial planets mercury venus earth mars jovian planets jupiter saturn uranus neptune • neptune o blue planet o magnetic field is off center and far from the rotation axis o farthest from the sun terrestrial vs. jovian there are two obvious groups of planets in the solar system: the earth-like planets and the jupiter-like planets. the earth-like planets are called terrestrial planets.
the jupiter-like planets are called jovian planets. they have very different characteristics. terrestrial planets • mercury, venus, earth, mars • close to the sun • close to the neighbors • weak or no magnetic fields • smaller • few moons • no rings • rocky jovian planets • jupiter, saturn, uranus, neptune • further from the sun • neighbors are far apart • strong magnetic fields • larger • many moons • rings • gaseous • most emit more energy than they receive from the sun astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 126 figure 161: planetary alignments planetary alignments as planets orbit the sun, there are times when the sun, the earth and planets form a line in space. this is called an alignment. when the sun and the planets are in the sky together, on the same side of the earth it is called a conjunction. when the planet and the sun are on opposite sides of the earth it is called an opposition. these different alignments are shown in figure .: opposition, inferior conjunction, superior conjunction, and conjunction.