clyde william tombaugh (1906-1997) was the son of a farmer in streator, illinois, who got bitten by the astronomy bug as a boy. his plans to attend college were thwarted, however, when a hail storm destroyed an entire crop, plunging his family into debt. beginning in 1926 tombaugh began building a series of telescopes from materials he could scrounge, and he made sketches of his observations of mars and jupiter. he sent some of his work to the lowell observatory in flagstaff, arizona, which was famous for its work on [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page469_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 470 figure 509: lowell observatory telescope photo by lowell observatory figure 510: percival lowell public domain mars. he was hoping for advice on how to improve his methods. what he got in return was a job offer. when tombaugh arrived in flagstaff in january, 1929, he was taken under the wing of the observatory’s director, vesto slipher.
tombaugh was an amateur who needed to be trained in every aspect of his assigned duties: there was the use and maintenance of the 13-inch refractor; there was the zeiss blink comparator; there were the 14” by 17” photographic plates that had to be precisely mounted to the scope and developed with extreme care. all of these tasks would be needed for the project he was assigned: go out and discover a new planet. the effort to find a planet beyond the orbit of neptune was begun by the observatory’s founder, percival lawrence lowell (1855-1916), a member of the wealthy lowell family of boston, massachusetts. he was sent to harvard, of course, where he graduated with highest honors in mathematics. subsequently he worked in the family business, and traveled widely throughout asia. when he returned he decided to build a private observatory, and chose flagstaff, in the arizona territory, because of its altitude and for the many nights of clear weather.
inspired by the work of italian astronomer, giovanni schiaparelli, who had mapped “canali” (italian for “channels”) on the surface of mars, lowell decided to commit himself to the study of the red planet’s “canals,” because he believed mars was inhabited by an advanced race of beings that had desperately constructed canals to funnel water from the martian polar icecaps to its population centers in ever-widening central deserts. in 1894 he began construction of lowell observatory, and in 1896 he received from alvan clark & sons a 24-inch refracting telescope. searching for martians was not lowell’s only interest. early on he became aware that neptune alone could not account for all the perturbations in the orbit of uranus. between 1896 and his death in 1916, lowell assembled an experienced staff and a number of additional instruments, including a 42-inch reflector telescope, to begin the search for the new planet. but lowell’s death brought operations nearly to a standstill due to complications with his will.
not until 1926 was the search resumed, at which time the observatory commissioned a 13-inch astrograph, specially designed for wide field [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page470_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page470_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 471 figure 511: the blink comparator photo by nivium photography, by c. a. r. lundin, chief optician at alvan clark & sons. they took delivery of the astrograph one month after the arrival of clyde tombaugh. after mastering all the steps in the process of imaging, tombaugh had to perform the incredibly tedious comparison of the developed plates. each plate contained images of hundreds of individual stars, each of which would have to be compared with their positions on a second photographic plate taken several days or weeks before. this was done with a blink comparator, a device that projected first one, then the other plate to the viewer, who would blink them back and forth looking for any change in position. almost always, no change would be observed, and tombaugh would mark each star as he went.