thus far, the coldest temperature at which any microbe has been shown to reproduce is about –25 ºc. conditions that are very acidic or alkaline can also be problematic for life because many of our important molecules, like proteins and dna, are broken down under such conditions. for example, household drain cleaner, which does its job by breaking down the chemical structure of things like hair clogs, is a very alkaline solution. the most acid-tolerant organisms (acidophiles) are capable of living at ph values near zero—about ten million times more acidic than your blood (figure 30.9). at the other extreme, some alkaliphiles can grow at ph levels of about 13, which is comparable to the ph of household bleach and almost a million times more alkaline than your blood. 30.2 • astrobiology 1065 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1083_img1.jpeg] figure 30.9 spain’s rio tinto. with a ph close to 2, rio tinto is literally a river of acid. acid-loving microorganisms (acidophiles) not only thrive in these waters, their metabolic activities help generate the acid in the first place.
the rusty red color that gives the river its name comes from high levels of iron dissolved in the waters. high levels of salts in the environment can also cause a problem for life because the salt blocks some cellular functions. humans recognized this centuries ago and began to salt-cure food to keep it from spoiling—meaning, to keep it from being colonized by microorganisms. yet some microbes have evolved to grow in water that is saturated in sodium chloride (table salt)—about ten times as salty as seawater (figure 30.10). figure 30.10 salt ponds. the waters of an evaporative salt works near san francisco are colored pink by thriving communities of photosynthetic organisms. these waters are about ten times as salty as seawater—enough for sodium chloride to begin to crystallize out—yet some organisms can survive and thrive in these conditions. (credit: modification of work by nasa) very high pressures can literally squeeze life’s biomolecules, causing them to adopt more compact forms that do not work very well. but we still find life—not just microbial, but even animal life—at the bottoms of our ocean trenches, where pressures are more than 1000 times atmospheric pressure.
many other adaptions to environmental “extremes” are also known. there is even an organism, deinococcus radiodurans, that can tolerate ionizing radiation (such as that released by radioactive elements) a thousand times more intense than you would be able to withstand. it is also very good at surviving extreme desiccation (drying out) and a variety 1066 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1084_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page1084_img2.jpeg] of metals that would be toxic to humans. from many such examples, we can conclude that life is capable of tolerating a wide range of environmental extremes—so much so that we have to work hard to identify places where life can’t exist. a few such places are known—for example, the waters of hydrothermal vents at over 300 °c appear too hot to support any life—and finding these places helps define the possibility for life elsewhere. the study of extremophiles over the last few decades has expanded our sense of the range of conditions life can survive and, in doing so, has made many scientists more optimistic about the possibility that life might exist beyond earth.
30.3 searching for life beyond earth learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: astronomers and planetary scientists continue to search for life in the solar system and the universe at large. in this section, we discuss two kinds of searches. first is the direct exploration of planets within our own solar system, especially mars and some of the icy moons of the outer solar system. second is the even more difficult task of searching for evidence of life—a biomarker—on planets circling other stars. in the next section, we will examine seti, the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. as you will see, the approaches taken in these three cases are very different, even though the goal of each is the same: to determine if life on earth is unique in the universe. life on mars the possibility that mars hosts, or has hosted, life has a rich history dating back to the “canals” that some people claimed to see on the martian surface toward the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth.