and, since the moon’s orbit is tilted relative to the path of the sun in the sky, earth’s shadow misses the moon most months. that’s why we regularly get treated to a full moon. the times when earth’s shadow does fall on the moon are called lunar eclipses and are discussed in eclipses of the sun and moon. astronomy and the days of the week the week seems independent of celestial motions, although its length may have been based on the time between quarter phases of the moon. in western culture, the seven days of the week are named after the seven “wanderers” that the ancients saw in the sky: the sun, the moon, and the five planets visible to the unaided eye (mercury, venus, mars, jupiter, and saturn). in english, we can easily recognize the names sun-day (sunday), moon-day (monday), and saturn-day (saturday), but the other days are named after the norse equivalents of the roman gods that gave their names to the planets. in languages more directly related to latin, the correspondences are clearer.
wednesday, mercury’s day, for example, is mercoledi in italian, mercredi in french, and miércoles in spanish. mars gives its name to tuesday (martes in spanish), jupiter or jove to thursday (giovedi in italian), and venus to friday (vendredi in french). there is no reason that the week has to have seven days rather than five or eight. it is interesting to speculate that if we had lived in a planetary system where more planets were visible without a telescope, the beatles could have been right and we might well have had “eight days a week.” making connections 4.5 • phases and motions of the moon 119 this simulation of the moon orbiting the earth (https://openstax.org/l/30moonorbit) shows both a “top- down” view and the view from earth’s surface. the moon’s revolution and rotation the moon’s sidereal period—that is, the period of its revolution about earth measured with respect to the stars—is a little over 27 days: the sidereal month is 27.3217 days to be exact.
the time interval in which the phases repeat—say, from full to full—is the solar month, 29.5306 days. the difference results from earth’s motion around the sun. the moon must make more than a complete turn around the moving earth to get back to the same phase with respect to the sun. as we saw, the moon changes its position on the celestial sphere rather rapidly: even during a single evening, the moon creeps visibly eastward among the stars, traveling its own width in a little less than 1 hour. the delay in moonrise from one day to the next caused by this eastward motion averages about 50 minutes. the moon rotates on its axis in exactly the same time that it takes to revolve about earth. as a consequence, the moon always keeps the same face turned toward earth (figure 4.15). you can simulate this yourself by “orbiting” your roommate or another volunteer. start by facing your roommate.
if you make one rotation (spin) with your shoulders in the exact same time that you revolve around him or her, you will continue to face your roommate during the whole “orbit.” as we will see in coming chapters, our moon is not the only world that exhibits this behavior, which scientists call synchronous rotation. link to learning 120 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org figure 4.15 the moon without and with rotation. in this figure, we stuck a white arrow into a fixed point on the moon to keep track of its sides. (a) if the moon did not rotate as it orbited earth, it would present all of its sides to our view; hence the white arrow would point directly toward earth only in the bottom position on the diagram. (b) actually, the moon rotates in the same period that it revolves, so we always see the same side (the white arrow keeps pointing to earth). the differences in the moon’s appearance from one night to the next are due to changing illumination by the sun, not to its own rotation.