for life as we know it, that solvent is water, which has a variety of properties that are critical to how our biochemistry works. water is abundant in the universe, but life requires that water be in liquid form (rather than ice or gas) in order to properly fill its role in biochemistry. that is the case only within a certain range of temperatures and pressures—too high or too low in either variable, and water takes the form of a solid or a gas. identifying environments where water is present within the appropriate range of temperature and pressure is thus an important first step in identifying habitable environments. indeed, a “follow the water” strategy has been, and continues to be, a key driver in the exploration of planets both within and beyond our solar system. our biochemistry is based on molecules made of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur. carbon is at the core of organic chemistry. its ability to form four bonds, both with itself and with the other elements of life, allows for the formation of a vast number of potential molecules on which to base link to learning 1062 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org biochemistry.
the remaining elements contribute structure and chemical reactivity to our biomolecules, and form the basis of many of the interactions among them. these “biogenic elements,” sometimes referred to with the acronym chnops (carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur), are the raw materials from which life is assembled, and an accessible supply of them is a second requirement of habitability. as we learned in previous chapters on nuclear fusion and the life story of the stars, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur are all formed by fusion within stars and then distributed out into their galaxy as those stars die. but how they are distributed among the planets that form within a new star system, in what form, and how chemical, physical, and geological processes on those planets cycle the elements into structures that are accessible to biology, can have significant impacts on the distribution of life. in earth’s oceans, for example, the abundance of phytoplankton (simple organisms that are the base of the ocean food chain) in surface waters can vary by a thousand-fold because the supply of nitrogen differs from place to place (figure 30.6).
understanding what processes control the accessibility of elements at all scales is thus a critical part of identifying habitable environments. figure 30.6 chlorophyll abundance. the abundance of chlorophyll (an indicator of photosynthetic bacteria and algae) varies by almost a thousand-fold across the ocean basins. that variation is almost entirely due to the availability of nitrogen—one of the major “biogenic elements” in forms that can be used by life. (credit: modification of work by nasa, gene c. feldman) with these first two requirements, we have the elemental raw materials of life and a solvent in which to assemble them into the complicated molecules that drive our biochemistry. but carrying out that assembly and maintaining the complicated biochemical machinery of life takes energy. you fulfill your own requirement for energy every time you eat food or take a breath, and you would not live for long if you failed to do either on a regular basis. life on earth makes use of two main types of energy: for you, these are the oxygen in the air you breathe and the organic molecules in your food. but life overall can use a much wider array of chemicals and, while all animals require oxygen, many bacteria do not.
one of the earliest known life processes, which still operates in some modern microorganisms, combines hydrogen and carbon dioxide to make methane, releasing energy in the process. there are microorganisms that “breathe” metals that would be toxic to us, and even some that breathe in sulfur and breathe out sulfuric acid. plants and photosynthetic microorganisms have also evolved mechanisms to use the energy in light directly. water in the liquid phase, the biogenic elements, and energy are the fundamental requirements for habitability. but are there additional environmental constraints? we consider this in the next section. 30.2 • astrobiology 1063 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1081_img1.jpeg] figure 30.7 grand prismatic spring in yellowstone national park. this hot spring, where water emerges from the bluish center at temperatures near the local boiling point (about 92 ºc), supports a thriving array of microbial life. the green, yellow, and orange colors around the edges come from thick “mats” of photosynthetic bacteria. in fact, their coloration in part demonstrates their use of light energy—some wavelengths of incoming sunlight are selectively captured for energy; the rest are reflected back.