describe how latitude and longitude are used to map earth explain how right ascension and declination are used to map the sky 102 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org figure 4.2 latitude and longitude of washington, dc. we use latitude and longitude to find cities like washington, dc, on a globe. latitude is the number of degrees north or south of the equator, and longitude is the number of degrees east or west of the prime meridian. washington, dc’s coordinates are 38° n and 77° w. why greenwich, you might ask? every country wanted 0° longitude to pass through its own capital. greenwich, the site of the old royal observatory (figure 4.3), was selected because it was between continental europe and the united states, and because it was the site for much of the development of the method to measure longitude at sea. longitudes are measured either to the east or to the west of the greenwich meridian from 0° to 180°. as an example, the longitude of the clock-house benchmark of the u.s. naval observatory in washington, dc, is 77.066° w.
figure 4.3 royal observatory in greenwich, england. at the internationally agreed-upon zero point of longitude at the royal observatory greenwich, tourists can stand and straddle the exact line where longitude “begins.”(credit left: modification of work by “pdbreen”/flickr; credit right: modification of work by ben sutherland) your latitude (or north-south location) is the number of degrees of arc you are away from the equator along your meridian. latitudes are measured either north or south of the equator from 0° to 90°. (the latitude of the equator is 0°.) as an example, the latitude of the previously mentioned naval observatory benchmark is 38.921° n. the latitude of the south pole is 90° s, and the latitude of the north pole is 90° n. locating places in the sky positions in the sky are measured in a way that is very similar to the way we measure positions on the surface of earth. instead of latitude and longitude, however, astronomers use coordinates called declination and right ascension. to denote positions of objects in the sky, it is often convenient to make use of the fictitious celestial sphere.
we saw in observing the sky: the birth of astronomy that the sky appears to rotate about points 4.1 • earth and sky 103 [image: astronomy_openstax_page121_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page121_img2.jpeg] above the north and south poles of earth—points in the sky called the north celestial pole and the south celestial pole. halfway between the celestial poles, and thus 90° from each pole, is the celestial equator, a great circle on the celestial sphere that is in the same plane as earth’s equator. we can use these markers in the sky to set up a system of celestial coordinates. declination on the celestial sphere is measured the same way that latitude is measured on the sphere of earth: from the celestial equator toward the north (positive) or south (negative). so polaris, the star near the north celestial pole, has a declination of almost +90°. right ascension (ra) is like longitude, except that instead of greenwich, the arbitrarily chosen point where we start counting is the vernal equinox, a point in the sky where the ecliptic (the sun’s path) crosses the celestial equator.
ra can be expressed either in units of angle (degrees) or in units of time. this is because the celestial sphere appears to turn around earth once a day as our planet turns on its axis. thus the 360° of ra that it takes to go once around the celestial sphere can just as well be set equal to 24 hours. then each 15° of arc is equal to 1 hour of time. for example, the approximate celestial coordinates of the bright star capella are ra and declination . one way to visualize these circles in the sky is to imagine earth as a transparent sphere with the terrestrial coordinates (latitude and longitude) painted on it with dark paint. imagine the celestial sphere around us as a giant ball, painted white on the inside. then imagine yourself at the center of earth, with a bright light bulb in the middle, looking out through its transparent surface to the sky. the terrestrial poles, equator, and meridians will be projected as dark shadows on the celestial sphere, giving us the system of coordinates in the sky. the turning earth why do many stars rise and set each night? why, in other words, does the night sky seem to turn?