these models show that material begins to coalesce first by forming smaller objects, precursors of the planets, which we call planetesimals. today’s fast computers can simulate the way millions of planetesimals, probably no larger than 100 kilometers in diameter, might gather together under their mutual gravity to form the planets we see today. we are beginning to understand that this process was a violent one, with planetesimals crashing into each other and sometimes even disrupting the growing planets themselves. as a consequence of those violent impacts (and the heat from radioactive elements in them), all the planets were heated until they were liquid and gas, and therefore differentiated, which helps explain their present internal structures. the process of impacts and collisions in the early solar system was complex and, apparently, often random. 246 7 • other worlds: an introduction to the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page264_img1.jpeg] the solar nebula model can explain many of the regularities we find in the solar system, but the random collisions of massive collections of planetesimals could be the reason for some exceptions to the “rules” of solar system behavior. for example, why do the planets uranus and pluto spin on their sides?
why does venus spin slowly and in the opposite direction from the other planets? why does the composition of the moon resemble earth in many ways and yet exhibit substantial differences? the answers to such questions probably lie in enormous collisions that took place in the solar system long before life on earth began. today, some 4.5 billion years after its origin, the solar system is—thank goodness—a much less violent place. as we will see, however, some planetesimals have continued to interact and collide, and their fragments move about the solar system as roving “transients” that can make trouble for the established members of the sun’s family, such as our own earth. (we discuss this “troublemaking” in comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system.) a great variety of infographics (https://openstax.org/l/30worldsinsolar) at space.com let you explore what it would be like to live on various worlds in the solar system.
link to learning 7.4 • origin of the solar system 247 key terms asteroid a stony or metallic object orbiting the sun that is smaller than a planet but that shows no evidence of an atmosphere or of other types of activity associated with comets comet a small body of icy and dusty matter that revolves about the sun; when a comet comes near the sun, some of its material vaporizes, forming a large head of tenuous gas and often a tail differentiation gravitational separation of materials of different density into layers in the interior of a planet or moon giant planet any of the planets jupiter, saturn, uranus, and neptune in our solar system, or planets of roughly that mass and composition in other planetary systems half-life time required for half of the radioactive atoms in a sample to disintegrate meteor a small piece of solid matter that enters earth’s atmosphere and burns up, popularly called a shooting star because it is seen as a small flash of light meteorite a portion of a meteor that survives passage through an atmosphere and strikes the ground planetesimals objects, from tens to hundreds of kilometers in diameter, that formed in the solar nebula as an intermediate step between tiny grains and the larger planetary objects we see today; the comets and some asteroids may be leftover planetesimals radioactivity process by which certain kinds of atomic nuclei decay naturally, with the spontaneous emission of subatomic particles and gamma rays solar nebula the cloud of gas and dust from which the solar system formed terrestrial planet any of the planets mercury, venus, earth, or mars; sometimes the moon is included in the list summary 7.1 overview of our planetary system our solar system currently consists of the sun, eight planets, five dwarf planets, more than 280 known moons, and a host of smaller objects.