[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page244_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page244_img2.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page244_img3.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page244_img4.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 245 figure 294: proton-proton chain nuclear fusion component 102 – fusion in the sun what is fusion? fusion is the combining of smaller nuclei to create larger nuclei. this is the process through which all of the elements of the periodic table are created. when two nuclei fuse together some mass is converted into energy and is emitted as photons. nuclei of atoms are positively charged. things of similar charge repel each other, just as the north poles of two magnets will repel each other. in order to make fusion possible, it is necessary to get the nuclei close enough together so that the strong force will overcome the electromagnetic force and cause the nuclei to stick together. stars accomplish this by very high pressures – which force the nuclei closer together, and very high temperatures – which cause the nuclei to move faster and overcome much of the repulsive force.
proton-proton chain fusion for a star similar to the sun or smaller, the primary fusion process to convert hydrogen into helium is proton-proton fusion. once the core temperature reaches approximately 10,000,000 k, there is enough energy to start the fusion process. overall, 6 protons and two electrons combine to form 1 helium atom, 2 protons, 2 neutrinos and two gamma ray photons. note that two of the protons are returned to be used in other fusion reactions. protons make deuterium, which then makes helium 3, which then makes helium. the positrons combine with electrons to produce gamma rays. this is the process that the sun uses to convert hydrogen into helium. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page245_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 246 the solar neutrino problem was that we were not detecting enough neutrinos. the sun makes helium from four protons figure 295: daya bay neutrino detector photo by roy kaltschmidt neutrinos – “the little ones” in the sun, the gamma rays are transformed into other frequencies of electromagnetic radiation before they exit the sun.
this means that there is no direct evidence in the emitted electromagnetic radiation to confirm that the proton-proton-chain process is occurring inside the core of the sun. the only other evidence emitted is the neutrinos. neutrinos are very small, travel very fast, and tend not to interact with matter. they are able to exit the sun in a few seconds after they are created. we have built large detectors to try to confirm the presence of the neutrinos. one type of detector uses chlorine or gallium to detect the neutrinos. when a neutrino strikes an atom, chlorine changes into argon and gallium changes into germanium. both of these atoms are radioactive and emit radiation which can easily be detected. another design uses a large chamber of water surrounded by photodetectors. when a neutrino impacts an electron in a water molecule, the electron is accelerated to close to the speed of light. it then gives off ultraviolet photons which can be detected. although the detectors have detected solar neutrinos, they do not detect the number that is expected based on the model. this shortcoming is called the solar neutrino problem.
since the experiments were done with very high accuracy and precision, either the theory is wrong and less neutrinos are being produced in the sun, or for some reason they are not making it to the detectors. since the physics seems to correlate with other known models and data, it is likely that the answer may be in the neutrinos themselves. it is believed that neutrinos experience neutrino oscillations. this means that the neutrinos change into another type of neutrino. in 2002 evidence was found to support the theory that [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page246_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 247 the sun is too small to fuse its carbon into oxygen or any heavier elements. the sun will end its life as a white dwarf with a core of mostly carbon and a little oxygen figure 296: the triple alpha process - carbon the neutrinos created in the sun are making it to earth as expected, and through the oscillations, they have been detected in the appropriate quantities.