simon-miller (nasa goddard space flight center)) the largest and most famous of jupiter’s storms is the great red spot, a reddish oval in the southern hemisphere that changes slowly; it was 25,000 kilometers long when voyager arrived in 1979, but it had shrunk to 20,000 kilometers by the end of the galileo mission in 2000 (figure 11.19). the giant storm has persisted in jupiter’s atmosphere ever since astronomers were first able to observe it after the invention of the telescope, more than 300 years ago. however, it has continued to shrink and has become more nearly circular, raising speculation that we may see its end within a few decades. measurements from the juno spacecraft of variations in jupiter’s gravity field indicate that the depth of the red spot storm system is only a few hundred kilometers—a finding that challenges some of the models astronomers have made of this long-lasting weather system. figure 11.19 jupiter’s great red spot. this is the largest storm system on jupiter, as seen during the voyager spacecraft flyby. below and to the right of the red spot is one of the white ovals, which are similar but smaller high-pressure features.
the white oval 11.3 • atmospheres of the giant planets 385 [image: astronomy_openstax_page403_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page403_img2.jpeg] is roughly the size of planet earth, to give you a sense of the huge scale of the weather patterns we are seeing. the colors on the jupiter image have been somewhat exaggerated here so astronomers (and astronomy students) can study their differences more effectively. see figure 11.2 to get a better sense of the colors your eye would actually see near jupiter. (credit: nasa/jpl) in addition to its longevity, the red spot differs from terrestrial storms in being a high-pressure region; on our planet, such storms are regions of lower pressure. the red spot’s counterclockwise rotation has a period of six days. three similar but smaller disturbances (about as big as earth) formed on jupiter in the 1930s. they look like white ovals, and one can be seen clearly below and to the right of the great red spot in figure 11.19. in 1998, the galileo spacecraft watched as two of these ovals collided and merged into one.
we don’t know what causes the great red spot or the white ovals, but we do have an idea how they can last so long once they form. on earth, the lifetime of a large oceanic hurricane or typhoon is typically a few weeks, or even less when it moves over the continents and encounters friction with the land. jupiter has no solid surface to slow down an atmospheric disturbance; furthermore, the sheer size of the disturbances lends them stability. we can calculate that on a planet with no solid surface, the lifetime of anything as large as the red spot should be measured in centuries, while lifetimes for the white ovals should be measured in decades, which is pretty much what we have observed. despite neptune’s smaller size and different cloud composition, voyager showed that it had an atmospheric feature surprisingly similar to jupiter’s great red spot. neptune’s great dark spot was nearly 10,000 kilometers long (figure 11.15). on both planets, the giant storms formed at latitude 20° s, had the same shape, and took up about the same fraction of the planet’s diameter. the great dark spot rotated with a period of 17 days, versus about 6 days for the great red spot.
when the hubble space telescope examined neptune in the mid-1990s, however, astronomers could find no trace of the great dark spot on their images. although many of the details of the weather on the jovian planets are not yet understood, it is clear that if you are a fan of dramatic weather, these worlds are the place to look. we study the features in these atmospheres not only for what they have to teach us about conditions in the jovian planets, but also because we hope they can help us understand the weather on earth just a bit better. e x a m p l e 1 1 . 1 storms and winds the wind speeds in circular storm systems can be formidable on both earth and the giant planets. think about our big terrestrial hurricanes. if you watch their behavior in satellite images shown on weather outlets, you will see that they require about one day to rotate. if a storm has a diameter of 400 km and rotates once in 24 h, what is the wind speed? solution speed equals distance divided by time.