you can watch a video (https://openstax.org/l/30huytatsurf) about the descent of huygens to titan’s surface. habitable planets orbiting other stars one of the most exciting developments in astronomy during the last two decades is the ability to detect exoplanets—planets orbiting other stars. as we saw in the chapter on the formation of stars and planets, since the discovery of the first exoplanet in 1995, there have been thousands of confirmed detections, and many more candidates that are not yet confirmed. these include several dozen possibly habitable exoplanets. such numbers finally allow us to make some predictions about exoplanets and their life-hosting potential. the majority of stars with mass similar to the sun appear to host at least one planet, with multi-planet systems like our own not unusual. how many of these planets might be habitable, and how could we search for life there? the nasa exoplanet archive (https://openstax.org/l/30nasaexoarc) is an up-to-date searchable online source of data and tools on everything to do with exoplanets.
explore stellar and exoplanet parameters and characteristics, find the latest news on exoplanet discoveries, plot your own data interactively, and link to other related resources. link to learning link to learning 30.3 • searching for life beyond earth 1071 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1089_img1.jpeg] in evaluating the prospect for life in distant planetary systems, astrobiologists have developed the idea of a habitable zone—a region around a star where suitable conditions might exist for life. this concept focuses on life’s requirement for liquid water, and the habitable zone is generally thought of as the range of distances from the central star in which water could be present in liquid form at a planet’s surface. in our own solar system, for example, venus has surface temperatures far above the boiling point of water and mars has surface temperatures that are almost always below the freezing point of water. earth, which orbits between the two, has a surface temperature that is “just right” to keep much of our surface water in liquid form.
whether surface temperatures are suitable for maintaining liquid water depends on a planet’s “radiation budget” —how much starlight energy it absorbs and retains—and whether or how processes like winds and ocean circulation distribute that energy around the planet. how much stellar energy a planet receives, in turn, depends on how much and what sort of light the star emits and how far the planet is from that star,1 how much it reflects back to space, and how effectively the planet’s atmosphere can retain heat through the greenhouse effect (see earth as a planet). all of these can vary substantially, and all matter a lot. for example, venus receives about twice as much starlight per square meter as earth but, because of its dense cloud cover, also reflects about twice as much of that light back to space as earth does. mars receives only about half as much starlight as earth, but also reflects only about half as much. thus, despite their differing orbital distances, the three planets actually absorb comparable amounts of sunlight energy. why, then, are they so dramatically different?
as we learned in several chapters about the planets, some of the gases that make up planetary atmospheres are very effective at trapping infrared light—the very range of wavelengths at which planets radiate thermal energy back out to space—and this can raise the planet’s surface temperature quite a bit more than would otherwise be the case. this is the same “greenhouse effect” that is of such concern for global warming on our planet. earth’s natural greenhouse effect, which comes mostly from water vapor and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, raises our average surface temperature by about 33 °c over the value it would have if there were no greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. mars has a very thin atmosphere and thus very little greenhouse warming (about 2 °c worth), while venus has a massive carbon dioxide atmosphere that creates very strong greenhouse warming (about 510 °c worth). these worlds are much colder and much hotter, respectively, than earth would be if moved into their orbits. thus, we must consider the nature of any atmosphere as well as the distance from the star in evaluating the range of habitability. of course, as we have learned, stars also vary widely in the intensity and spectrum (the wavelengths of light) they emit.