the first global radar map was made by the us pioneer venus orbiter in the late 1970s, followed by better maps from the twin soviet venera 15 and 16 radar orbiters in the early 1980s. however, most of our information on the geology of venus is derived from the us magellan spacecraft, which mapped venus with a powerful imaging radar. magellan produced images with a resolution of 100 meters, much better than that of previous missions, yielding our first detailed look at the surface of our sister planet (figure 10.6). (the magellan spacecraft returned more data to earth than all previous planetary missions combined; each 100 minutes of data transmission from the spacecraft provided enough information, if translated into characters, to fill two 30-volume encyclopedias.) figure 10.6 radar map of venus. this composite image has a resolution of about 3 kilometers. colors have been added to indicate elevation, with blue meaning low and brown and white high. the large continent aphrodite stretches around the equator, where the bright (therefore rough) surface has been deformed by tectonic forces in the crust of venus.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/ jpl/usgs) consider for a moment how good magellan’s resolution of 100 meters really is. it means the radar images from venus can show anything on the surface larger than a football field. suddenly, a whole host of topographic features on venus became accessible to our view. as you look at the radar images throughout this chapter, bear in mind that these are constructed from radar reflections, not from visible-light photographs. for example, bright features on these radar images are an indication of rough terrain, whereas darker regions are smoother. probing through the clouds of venus the radar maps of venus reveal a planet that looks much the way earth might look if our planet’s surface were not constantly being changed by erosion and deposition of sediment. because there is no water or ice on venus and the surface wind speeds are low, almost nothing obscures or erases the complex geological features produced by the movements of venus’ crust, by volcanic eruptions, and by impact craters.
having 328 10 • earthlike planets: venus and mars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page346_img1.jpeg] finally penetrated below the clouds of venus, we find its surface to be naked, revealing the history of hundreds of millions of years of geological activity. about 75% of the surface of venus consists of lowland lava plains. superficially, these plains resemble the basaltic ocean basins of earth, but they were not produced in quite the same way. there is no evidence of subduction zones on venus, indicating that, unlike earth, this planet never experienced plate tectonics. although convection (the rising of hot materials) in its mantle generated great stresses in the crust of venus, they did not start large continental plates moving. the formation of the lava plains of venus more nearly resembles that of the lunar maria. both were the result of widespread lava eruptions without the crustal spreading associated with plate tectonics. rising above the lowland lava plains are two full-scale continents of mountainous terrain.
the largest continent on venus, called aphrodite, is about the size of africa (you can see it stand out in figure 10.6). aphrodite stretches along the equator for about one-third of the way around the planet. next in size is the northern highland region ishtar, which is about the size of australia. ishtar contains the highest region on the planet, the maxwell mountains, which rise 11 kilometers above the surrounding lowlands. (the maxwell mountains are the only feature on venus named after a man. they commemorate james clerk maxwell, whose theory of electromagnetism led to the invention of radar. all other features are named for women, either from history or mythology.) craters and the age of the venus surface one of the first questions astronomers addressed with the high-resolution magellan images was the age of the surface of venus. remember that the age of a planetary surface is rarely the age of the world it is on. a young age merely implies an active geology in that location. such ages can be derived from counting impact craters. figure 10.7 is an example of what these craters look like on the venus radar images.