800 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page818_img1.jpeg] several decades of careful observations have now shown that the crab nebula pulsar is not a perfectly regular clock as we originally thought: instead, it is gradually slowing down. having measured how much the pulsar is slowing down, we can calculate how much rotation energy the neutron star is losing. remember that it is very densely packed and spins amazingly quickly. even a tiny slowing down can mean an immense loss of energy. to the satisfaction of astronomers, the rotational energy lost by the pulsar turns out to be the same as the amount of energy emerging from the nebula surrounding it. in other words, the slowing down of a rotating neutron star can explain precisely why the crab nebula is glowing with the amount of energy we observe. the evolution of pulsars from observations of the pulsars discovered so far, astronomers have concluded that one new pulsar is born somewhere in the galaxy every 25 to 100 years, the same rate at which supernovae are estimated to occur.
calculations suggest that the typical lifetime of a pulsar is about 10 million years; after that, the neutron star no longer rotates fast enough to produce significant beams of particles and energy, and is no longer observable. we estimate that there are about 100 million neutron stars in our galaxy, most of them rotating too slowly to come to our notice. the crab pulsar is rather young (only about 960 years old) and has a short period, whereas other, older pulsars have already slowed to longer periods. pulsars thousands of years old have lost too much energy to emit appreciably in the visible and x-ray wavelengths, and they are observed only as radio pulsars; their periods are a second or longer. there is one other reason we can see only a fraction of the pulsars in the galaxy. consider our lighthouse model again. on earth, all ships approach on the same plane—the surface of the ocean—so the lighthouse can be built to sweep its beam over that surface. but in space, objects can be anywhere in three dimensions. as a given pulsar’s beam sweeps over a circle in space, there is absolutely no guarantee that this circle will include the direction of earth.
in fact, if you think about it, many more circles in space will not include earth than will include it. thus, we estimate that we are unable to observe a large number of neutron stars because their pulsar beams miss us entirely. at the same time, it turns out that only a few of the pulsars discovered so far are embedded in the visible clouds of gas that mark the remnant of a supernova. this might at first seem mysterious, since we know that supernovae give rise to neutron stars and we should expect each pulsar to have begun its life in a supernova explosion. but the lifetime of a pulsar turns out to be about 100 times longer than the length of time required for the expanding gas of a supernova remnant to disperse into interstellar space. thus, most pulsars are found with no other trace left of the explosion that produced them. in addition, some pulsars are ejected by a supernova explosion that is not the same in all directions. if the supernova explosion is stronger on one side, it can kick the pulsar entirely out of the supernova remnant (some astronomers call this “getting a birth kick”).
we know such kicks happen because we see a number of young supernova remnants in nearby galaxies where the pulsar is to one side of the remnant and racing away at several hundred miles per second (figure 23.17). 23.4 • pulsars and the discovery of neutron stars 801 figure 23.17 speeding pulsar. this intriguing image (which combines x-ray, visible, and radio observations) shows the jet trailing behind a pulsar (at bottom right, lined up between the two bright stars). with a length of 37 light-years, the jet trail (seen in purple) is the longest ever observed from an object in the milky way. (there is also a mysterious shorter, comet-like tail that is almost perpendicular to the purple jet.) moving at a speed between 2.5 and 5 million miles per hour, the pulsar is traveling away from the core of the supernova remnant where it originated.