(figure 4.21 shows the distance of the observer varying at points 1–4, but the idea is the same.) much of the time, the moon looks slightly smaller than the sun and cannot cover it completely, even if the two are perfectly aligned. in this type of “annular eclipse,” there is a ring of light around the dark sphere of the moon. 126 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page144_img1.jpeg] however, if an eclipse of the sun occurs when the moon is somewhat nearer than its average distance, the moon can completely hide the sun, producing a total solar eclipse. another way to say it is that a total eclipse of the sun occurs at those times when the umbra of the moon’s shadow reaches the surface of earth. the geometry of a total solar eclipse is illustrated in figure 4.22. if the sun and moon are properly aligned, then the moon’s darkest shadow intersects the ground at a small point on earth’s surface. anyone on earth within the small area covered by the tip of the moon’s shadow will, for a few minutes, be unable to see the sun and will witness a total eclipse.
at the same time, observers on a larger area of earth’s surface who are in the penumbra will see only a part of the sun eclipsed by the moon: we call this a partial solar eclipse. between earth’s rotation and the motion of the moon in its orbit, the tip of the moon’s shadow sweeps eastward at about 1500 kilometers per hour along a thin band across the surface of earth. the thin zone across earth within which a total solar eclipse is visible (weather permitting) is called the eclipse path. within a region about 3000 kilometers on either side of the eclipse path, a partial solar eclipse is visible. it does not take long for the moon’s shadow to sweep past a given point on earth. the duration of totality may be only a brief instant; it can never exceed about 7 minutes. figure 4.22 geometry of a total solar eclipse. note that our diagram is not to scale. the moon blocks the sun during new moon phase as seen from some parts of earth and casts a shadow on our planet. because a total eclipse of the sun is so spectacular, it is well worth trying to see one if you can.
there are some people whose hobby is “eclipse chasing” and who brag about how many they have seen in their lifetimes. because much of earth’s surface is water, eclipse chasing can involve lengthy boat trips (and often requires air travel as well). as a result, eclipse chasing is rarely within the budget of a typical college student. nevertheless, a list of future eclipses is given for your reference in appendix h, just in case you strike it rich early. appearance of a total eclipse what can you see if you are lucky enough to catch a total eclipse? a solar eclipse starts when the moon just begins to silhouette itself against the edge of the sun’s disk. a partial phase follows, during which more and more of the sun is covered by the moon. about an hour after the eclipse begins, the sun becomes completely hidden behind the moon. in the few minutes immediately before this period of totality begins, the sky noticeably darkens, some flowers close up, and chickens may go to roost. as an eerie twilight suddenly descends during the day, other animals (and people) may get disoriented. during totality, the sky is dark enough that planets become visible in the sky, and usually the brighter stars do as well.
as the bright disk of the sun becomes entirely hidden behind the moon, the sun’s remarkable corona flashes into view (figure 4.23). the corona is the sun’s outer atmosphere, consisting of sparse gases that extend for 4.7 • eclipses of the sun and moon 127 [image: astronomy_openstax_page145_img1.jpeg] millions of miles in all directions from the apparent surface of the sun. it is ordinarily not visible because the light of the corona is feeble compared with the light from the underlying layers of the sun. only when the brilliant glare from the sun’s visible disk is blotted out by the moon during a total eclipse is the pearly white corona visible. (we’ll talk more about the corona in the chapter on the sun: a garden-variety star.) figure 4.23 the sun’s corona. the corona (thin outer atmosphere) of the sun is visible during a total solar eclipse. (it looks more extensive in photographs than it would to the unaided eye.) (credit: modification of work by lutfar rahman nirjhar) the total phase of the eclipse ends, as abruptly as it began, when the moon begins to uncover the sun.