astronomers believe that the bright areas are mostly ice, while the darker areas are more eroded, ice-poor material. (b) these high-resolution images, taken by nasa’s galileo spacecraft in may 2001, show the icy spires (top) on callisto’s surface, with darker dust that has slid down as the ice erodes, collecting in the low-lying areas. the spires are about 80 to 100 meters tall. as the surface erodes even further, the icy spires eventually disappear, leaving impact craters exposed, as shown in the lower image. (credit a: modification of work by nasa/jpl/dlr; credit b: modification of work by nasa/jpl/arizona state university, academic research lab) in thinking about ice so far from the sun, we must take care not to judge its behavior from the much warmer ice we know and love on earth. at the temperatures of the outer solar system, ice on the surface is nearly as hard as rock, and it behaves similarly. ice on callisto does not deform or flow like ice in glaciers on earth.
ganymede, the largest moon ganymede, the largest moon in the solar system, also shows a great deal of cratering (figure 12.4). recall from other worlds: an introduction to the solar system that we can use crater counts on solid worlds to estimate the age of the surface. the more craters, the longer the surface has been exposed to battering from space, and the older it must therefore be. about one-quarter of ganymede’s surface seems to be as old and heavily cratered as that of callisto; the rest formed more recently, as we can tell by the sparse covering of impact craters as well as the relative freshness of those craters. if we judge from crater counts, this fresher terrain on ganymede is somewhat younger than the lunar maria or the martian volcanic plains, perhaps 2 to 3 billion years old. the differences between ganymede and callisto are more than skin deep. ganymede is a differentiated world, like the terrestrial planets. measurements of its gravity field tell us that the rock sank to form a core about the size of our moon, with a mantle and crust of ice “floating” above it.
in addition, the galileo spacecraft discovered that ganymede has a magnetic field, the sure signature of a partially molten interior. there is very likely liquid water trapped within the interior. thus, ganymede is not a dead world but rather a place of intermittent geological activity powered by an internal heat source. some surface features could be as young as the surface of venus (a few hundred million years). the younger terrain was formed by tectonic and volcanic forces (figure 12.4). in some places, the crust apparently cracked, flooding many of the craters with water from the interior. extensive mountain ranges were formed from compression of the crust, forming long ridges with parallel valleys spaced a few kilometers apart. in some areas, older impact craters were split and pulled apart. there are even indications of large-scale crustal movements that are similar to the plate tectonics of earth. 12.2 • the galilean moons of jupiter 397 [image: astronomy_openstax_page415_img1.jpeg] figure 12.4 ganymede. (a) this global view of ganymede, the largest moon in the solar system, was taken by voyager 2.
the colors are enhanced to make spotting differences easier. darker places are older, more heavily cratered regions; the lighter areas are younger (the reverse of our moon). the brightest spots are sites of geologically recent impacts. (b) this close-up of nicholson regio on ganymede shows an old impact crater (on the lower left-hand side) that has been split and pulled apart by tectonic forces. against ganymede’s dark terrain, a line of grooves and ridges appears to cut through the crater, deforming its circular shape. (credit a: modification of work by nasa/jpl/dlr; credit b: modification of work by nasa/jpl/brown university) why is ganymede so different from callisto? possibly the small difference in size and internal heating between the two led to this divergence in their evolution. but more likely the gravity of jupiter is to blame for ganymede’s continuing geological activity. ganymede is close enough to jupiter that tidal forces from the giant planet may have episodically heated its interior and triggered major convulsions on its crust. a tidal force results from the unequal gravitational pull on two sides of a body.