this diagram shows how the number of sunspots has changed with time since counts of the numbers of spots began to be recorded on a consistent scale. note the low number of spots during the early years of the nineteenth century, the little maunder minimum. (credit: modification of work by nasa/arc) when the number of sunspots is high, the sun is active in various other ways as well, and, as we will see in several sections below, some of this activity affects earth directly. for example, there are more auroral displays when the sunspot number is high. auroras are caused when energetically charged particles from the sun interact with earth’s magnetosphere, and the sun is more likely to spew out particles when it is active and the sunspot number is high. historical accounts also indicate that auroral activity was abnormally low throughout the several decades of the maunder minimum. the maunder minimum was a time of exceptionally low temperatures in europe—so low that this period is described as the little ice age. this coincidence in time caused scientists to try to understand whether small changes in the sun could affect the climate on earth. there is clear evidence that it was unusually cold in europe during part of the seventeenth century.
the river thames in london froze at least 11 times, ice appeared in the oceans off the coasts of southeast england, and low summer temperatures led to short growing seasons and poor harvests. however, whether and how changes on the sun on this timescale influence earth’s climate is still a matter of debate among scientists. other small changes in climate like the little ice age have occurred and have had their impacts on human history. for example, explorers from norway first colonized iceland and then reached greenland by 986. from there, they were able to make repeated visits to the northeastern coasts of north america, including newfoundland, between about 1000 and 1350. (the ships of the time did not allow the norse explorers to travel all the way to north america directly, but only from greenland, which served as a station for further exploration.) most of greenland is covered by ice, and the greenland station was never self-sufficient; rather, it depended on imports of food and other goods from norway for its survival. when a little ice age began in the thirteenth century, voyaging became very difficult, and support of the greenland colony was no longer possible.
the last- known contact with it was made by a ship from iceland blown off course in 1410. when european ships again began to visit greenland in 1577, the entire colony there had disappeared. the estimated dates for these patterns of migration follow what we know about solar activity. solar activity was unusually high between 1100 and 1250, which includes the time when the first european contacts were made with north america. activity was low from 1280 to 1340 and there was a little ice age, which was about the time regular contact with north america and between greenland and europe stopped. one must be cautious, however, about assuming that low sunspot numbers or variations in the sun’s output of energy caused the little ice age. there is no satisfactory model that can explain how a reduction in solar activity might cause cooler temperatures on earth. an alternative possibility is that the cold weather during the 534 15 • the sun: a garden-variety star access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page552_img1.jpeg] little ice age was related to volcanic activity. volcanoes can eject aerosols (tiny droplets or particles) into the atmosphere that efficiently reflect sunlight.
observations show, for example, that the pinatubo eruption in 1991 ejected so2 aerosols into the atmosphere, which reduced the amount of sunlight reaching earth’s surface enough to lower global temperatures by 0.4 °c. satellite data show that the energy output from the sun during a solar cycle varies by only about 0.1%. we know of no physical process that would explain how such a small variation could cause global temperature changes. the level of solar activity may, however, have other effects. for example, although the sun’s total energy output varies by only 0.1% during a solar cycle, its extreme ultraviolet radiation is 10 times higher at times of solar maximum than at solar minimum. this large variation can affect the chemistry and temperature structure of the upper atmosphere. one effect might be a reduction in the ozone layer and a cooling of the stratosphere near earth’s poles. this, in turn, could change the circulation patterns of winds aloft and, hence, the tracks of storms. there is some recent evidence that variations in regional rainfall correlate better with solar activity than does the global temperature of earth.