4.7 • eclipses of the sun and moon 129 [image: astronomy_openstax_page147_img1.jpeg] how to observe solar eclipses a total eclipse of the sun is a spectacular sight and should not be missed. however, it is extremely dangerous to look directly at the sun: even a brief exposure can damage your eyes. normally, few rational people are tempted to do this because it is painful (and something your mother told you never to do!). but during the partial phases of a solar eclipse, the temptation to take a look is strong. think before you give in. the fact that the moon is covering part of the sun doesn’t make the uncovered part any less dangerous to look at. still, there are perfectly safe ways to follow the course of a solar eclipse, if you are lucky enough to be in the path of the shadow. the easiest technique is to make a pinhole projector. take a piece of cardboard with a small (1 millimeter) hole punched in it, and hold it several feet above a light surface, such as a concrete sidewalk or a white sheet of paper, so that the hole is “aimed” at the sun. the hole produces a fuzzy but adequate image of the eclipsed sun.
alternatively, if it’s the right time of year, you can let the tiny spaces between a tree’s leaves form multiple pinhole images against a wall or sidewalk. watching hundreds of little crescent suns dancing in the breeze can be captivating. a kitchen colander also makes an excellent pinhole projector. although there are safe filters for looking at the sun directly, people have suffered eye damage by looking through improper filters, or no filter at all. for example, neutral density photographic filters are not safe because they transmit infrared radiation that can cause severe damage to the retina. also unsafe are smoked glass, completely exposed color film, sunglasses, and many other homemade filters. safe filters include welders’ goggles and specially designed eclipse glasses. you should certainly look at the sun directly when it is totally eclipsed, even through binoculars or telescopes. unfortunately, the total phase, as we discussed, is all too brief. but if you know when it is coming and going, be sure you look, for it’s an unforgettably beautiful sight.
and, despite the ancient folklore that presents eclipses as dangerous times to be outdoors, the partial phases of eclipses—as long as you are not looking directly at the sun—are not any more dangerous than being out in sunlight. during past eclipses, unnecessary panic has been created by uninformed public officials acting with the best intentions. there were two marvelous total eclipses in australia in the twentieth century during which townspeople held newspapers over their heads for protection and schoolchildren cowered indoors with their heads under their desks. what a pity that all those people missed what would have been one of the most memorable experiences of their lifetimes. on august 21, 2017, a total eclipse of the sun was visible across a large swath of the continental united states, and was seen by millions of people from around the country and the world (a). on april 8, 2024, another total eclipse of the sun crossed the continental u.s. in another direction, and again there was great public interest, with many people traveling to the zone of totality.
seeing for yourself 130 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org figure 4.25 2017 total solar and lunar eclipse (a) the eclipsed sun august 21, 2017, showing remarkable detail in the sun’s outer atmosphere. this is a composite of short, medium, and long exposures, as no single exposure can capture the huge range of brightness the sun exhibits. (b) a total eclipse of the moon seen over california on january 31, 2018. the moon moves slowly into the earth’s shadow, looks red when the eclipse is total and red sunlight refracts through the earth’s atmosphere, and then slowly moves out of the shadow. (credit a: modification of work by rick fienberg, american astronomical socity/travelquest international; credit b: modification of work by brian day.) for the august 2017 eclipse, the united states postal service issued a special commemorative stamp (https://openstax.org/l/302017ecliboo) — the first ever with “thermochromic ink” which changes when you touch it.