are there ways that scientists who are not as eloquent or charismatic as carl sagan or neil degrasse tyson can still contribute to the public understanding of science? e. your group has been named to a special committee by the international astronomical union to suggest 250 7 • collaborative group activities access for free at openstax.org names of features (such as craters, trenches, and so on) on a newly explored asteroid. given the restriction that any people after whom features are named must no longer be alive, what names or types of names would you suggest? (keep in mind that you are not restricted to names of people, by the way.) f. a member of your group has been kidnapped by a little-known religious cult that worships the planets. they will release him only if your group can tell which of the planets are currently visible in the sky during the evening and morning. you are forbidden from getting your instructor involved. how and where else could you find out the information you need? (be as specific as you can. if your instructor says it’s okay, feel free to answer this question using online or library resources.) g.
in the carl sagan: solar system advocate feature, you learned that science fiction helped spark and sustain his interest in astronomy. did any of the members of your group get interested in astronomy as a result of a science fiction story, movie, or tv show? did any of the stories or films you or your group members saw take place on the planets of our solar system? can you remember any specific ones that inspired you? if no one in the group is into science fiction, perhaps you can interview some friends or classmates who are and report back to the group. h. a list of nasa solar system spacecraft missions can be found at http://www.nasa.gov/content/solar- missions-list. your instructor will assign each group a mission. look up when the mission was launched and executed, and describe the mission goals, the basic characteristics of the spacecraft (type of instruments, propellant, size, and so on), and what was learned from the mission. if time allows, each group should present its findings to the rest of the class. i. what would be some of the costs or risks of developing a human colony or base on another planetary body? what technologies would need to be developed?
what would people need to give up to live on a different world in our solar system? exercises review questions 1. venus rotates backward and uranus and pluto spin about an axis tipped nearly on its side. based on what you learned about the motion of small bodies in the solar system and the surfaces of the planets, what might be the cause of these strange rotations? 2. what is the difference between a differentiated body and an undifferentiated body, and how might that influence a body’s ability to retain heat for the age of the solar system? 3. what does a planet need in order to retain an atmosphere? how does an atmosphere affect the surface of a planet and the ability of life to exist? 4. which type of planets have the most moons? where did these moons likely originate? 5. what is the difference between a meteor and a meteorite? 6. explain our ideas about why the terrestrial planets are rocky and have less gas than the giant planets. 7. do all planetary systems look the same as our own? 8. what is comparative planetology and why is it useful to astronomers? 9.
what changed in our understanding of the moon and moon-earth system as a result of humans landing on the moon’s surface? 10. if earth was to be hit by an extraterrestrial object, where in the solar system could it come from and how would we know its source region? 11. list some reasons that the study of the planets has progressed more in the past few decades than any 7 • exercises 251 other branch of astronomy. 12. imagine you are a travel agent in the next century. an eccentric billionaire asks you to arrange a “guinness book of solar system records” kind of tour. where would you direct him to find the following (use this chapter and appendix f and appendix g): a. the least-dense planet b. the densest planet c. the largest moon in the solar system d. excluding the jovian planets, the planet where you would weigh the most on its surface (hint: weight is directly proportional to surface gravity.) e. the smallest planet f. the planet that takes the longest time to rotate g. the planet that takes the shortest time to rotate h. the planet with a diameter closest to earth’s i. the moon with the thickest atmosphere j. the densest moon k.