hydrogen and helium, which are the most abundant elements in stars in the solar neighborhood, are also the most abundant constituents of stars in both kinds of clusters. however, the abundances of the elements heavier than helium are very different. in the sun and most of its neighboring stars, the combined abundance (by mass) of the elements heavier than hydrogen and helium is 1–4% of the star’s mass. spectra show that most open-cluster stars also have 1–4% of their matter in the form of heavy elements. globular clusters, however, are a different story. the heavy- element abundance of stars in typical globular clusters is found to be only 1/10 to 1/100 that of the sun. a few very old stars not in clusters have been discovered with even lower abundances of heavy elements. the differences in chemical composition are a direct consequence of the formation of a cluster of stars. the very first generation of stars initially contained only hydrogen and helium. we have seen that these stars, in order to generate energy, created heavier elements in their interiors.
in the last stages of their lives, they 22.5 • the evolution of more massive stars 767 [image: astronomy_openstax_page785_img1.jpeg] ejected matter, now enriched in heavy elements, into the reservoirs of raw material between the stars. such matter was then incorporated into a new generation of stars. this means that the relative abundance of the heavy elements must be less and less as we look further into the past. we saw that the globular clusters are much older than the open clusters. since globular-cluster stars formed much earlier (that is, they are an earlier generation of stars) than those in open clusters, they have only a relatively small abundance of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium. as time passes, the proportion of heavier elements in the “raw material” that makes new stars and planets increases. this means that the first generation of stars that formed in our galaxy would not have been accompanied by a planet like earth, full of silicon, iron, and many other heavy elements. earth (and the astronomy students who live on it) was possible only after generations of stars had a chance to make and recycle their heavier elements. now the search is on for true first-generation stars, made only of hydrogen and helium.
theories predict that such stars should be very massive, live fast, and die quickly. they should have lived and died long ago. the place to look for them is in very distant galaxies that formed when the universe was only a few hundred million years old, but whose light is only arriving at earth now. approaching death compared with the main-sequence lifetimes of stars, the events that characterize the last stages of stellar evolution pass very quickly (especially for massive stars). as the star’s luminosity increases, its rate of nuclear fuel consumption goes up rapidly—just at that point in its life when its fuel supply is beginning to run down. after the prime fuel—hydrogen—is exhausted in a star’s core, we saw that other sources of nuclear energy are available to the star in the fusion of, first, helium, and then of other more complex elements. but the energy yield of these reactions is much less than that of the fusion of hydrogen to helium. and to trigger these reactions, the central temperature must be higher than that required for the fusion of hydrogen to helium, leading to even more rapid consumption of fuel. clearly this is a losing game, and very quickly the star reaches its end.
as it does so, however, some remarkable things can happen, as we will see in the death of stars.