other fusion in the sun once the sun has made enough helium from hydrogen to build up a helium core, and as the quantity of hydrogen available for fusion decreases, the core will contract and begin to fuse helium into carbon (the triple alpha process) and a little oxygen. two helium nuclei will fuse together to form beryllium when the core reaches the right pressure and temperature. this beryllium nucleus then fuses with another helium nucleus to form carbon. the beryllium nucleus has four protons and four neutrons. it is unstable and its half-life is 6.7*10−17 seconds. this means that the next helium nucleus must be there within that time (on average) or the beryllium will decay back into two helium nuclei. the temperate required for helium fusion is 100,000,000 k. the carbon nucleus is stable. a small amount of carbon fusion will occur near the surface of the carbon core and a small amount of oxygen will be created. sun-like stars are not massive enough to have sufficient gravity to continue the process of core contraction and associated increases in temperature and pressure. fusion of heavier elements is not possible.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page247_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 248 astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 249 *** section vi. astronomy – stars and galaxies [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page249_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 250 figure 297: true motion true motion = radial motion + transverse motion component 103 – the motion of stars everything in space is in motion relative to everything else. as einstein noted, there is no absolute frame of reference. this is true for all stars. but living on earth, our primary interest is in how they move relative to us. in astronomy we use spherical coordinates to describe where an object is relative to earth. the earth is at the center of the sphere defined by what we can see from the earth’s surface. we can use two coordinates. right ascension and declination, to locate any star on that sphere. transverse motion and transverse velocity when a star is moving on the sphere, this appears to us as transverse motion. the speed at which it is moving is its transverse velocity.
it can be measured as an angular velocity (arc- seconds per century), or if we know the distance, then it can be measured in units of distance (kilometers per second). this motion is also called proper motion. this motion can be measured directly from observations of the star taken years apart. radial motion and radial velocity the other component of a star’s motion is either towards us or away from us. this is called radial motion. this component can be measured using doppler shift. the lines in the spectrum of the star will be red-shifted if it is moving away from us, or blue-shifted if it is moving towards us. the amount of the shift tells us the velocity. true motion and true velocity the combination of the radial velocity and the transverse velocity will result in the true velocity and true motion. this is the actual motion of the star through space.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page250_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 251 equation 14: inverse-square law 𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐵𝑟𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 ∝𝐿𝑢𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒2 figure 298: inverse-square law diagram by borb component 104 – the luminosity of stars luminosity is a standard characteristic of every star. it is independent of the observer, like its diameter. it is an absolute value and is not changed by the distance of the observer. apparent brightness apparent brightness is how bright a star appears to be for an observer. since most of our observing is done from earth, it is how bright a star appears from earth.