light that reaches the mirror will always focus at the focal point for the parabaloid. newtonian telescope use a secondary mirror to deflect the light before the focal point to an eyepiece in the side of the telescope. note the newtonian focal point and the primary focal point in figure 84. coude telescope. a telescope that uses the coude focal point is similar to a newtonian telescope, but the secondary mirror sends the light back towards the primary mirror. before it reaches the primary mirror it is redirected by a tertiary mirror out of the telescope. in large research facilities this exit is often done through the altitude axis of rotation. this is simpler if you want to use fiber optics to send the signal to a control room or additional instruments. figure 85: coude focus drawing by jailbird figure 84: newtonian telescope drawing by krishnavedala two categories of telescopes: refracting and reflecting [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page74_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page74_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 75 cassegrain telescopes. large aperture newtonian telescopes become very large.
it is easy to imbalance them by connecting a heavy camera or ccd to the newtonian focus. cassegrain telescopes were developed to provide shorter telescope lengths and centerline installation for cameras and ccds. these are often called catadiopric telescopes. this means that they incorporate mirrors and lenses in their design. the light is folded inside the telescope, so the length of the telescope is roughly half of the length of a similar newtonian telescope. the light reflects off a primary mirror, reaches the secondary mirror and is then reflected back through a hole in the primary mirror to the cassegrain focal point. two common types of cassegrain telescopes are the schmidt-cassegrain and the maksutov cassegrain. these variations have a thin glass lens that the light passes through as it enters the telescope. focal points.
so depending on the mirror configuration, there are four focal points used in astronomical telescopes: • prime focus • newtonian focus • coude focus • cassegrain focus figure 86: cassegrain telescope drawing by griffinjbs the four focal points: • prime focus • newtonian focus • coude focus • cassegrain focus [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page75_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 76 two types of mounts: alt/az and equatorial other designs. there are many other designs of telescopes that have been developed to try to enhance the quality of the image. the ones presented here are the types that are most common, and that we will encounter in this class. altitude/azimuth (alt/az) mount. an alt/az mount is a simple mounting for a telescope. it lets the telescope move up and down (altitude) and the telescope can rotate (azimuth). this is ideal for a manually operated telescope since the movements align with the orientation of the observer. if you are using this mount and taking images with your telescope, it is necessary to make guiding adjustments in both altitude and azimuth.
this is more complex and not ideal for taking images. the mount is simple, easy to use and much lighter than an equatorial mount. equatorial mount. an equatorial mount is designed to follow objects in the night sky as they move across the sky due to the earth’s rotation. the mount’s movements are in declination (angle above and below the celestial equator) and right ascension (angle along the celestial equator). once you have found an object, it is only necessary to adjust the right ascension to guide the telescope . declination will not change. this means that equatorial mounts (see figure 88) are better suited to taking images. the mount tilts the telescope at an angle equal to the observer’s latitude. it is oriented towards north and it is ready to observe or to take images. the mount is heavier than the alt/az mount due to the counter weights. figure 87: altitude/azimuth mount photo by bashir001 figure 88: equatorial mount photo by gn842 [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page76_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page76_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 77 dobsonian telescope.