describe the physical characteristics of degenerate matter and explain how the mass and radius of degenerate stars are related plot the future evolution of a white dwarf and show how its observable features will change over time distinguish which stars will become white dwarfs 778 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org as the star’s core contracts, electrons are squeezed closer and closer together. eventually, a star like the sun becomes so dense that further contraction would in fact require two or more electrons to violate the rule against occupying the same place and moving in the same way. such a dense gas is said to be degenerate (a term coined by physicists and not related to the electron’s moral character). the electrons in a degenerate gas resist further crowding with tremendous pressure. (it’s as if the electrons said, “you can press inward all you want, but there is simply no room for any other electrons to squeeze in here without violating the rules of our existence.”) the degenerate electrons do not require an input of heat to maintain the pressure they exert, and so a star with this kind of structure, if nothing disturbs it, can last essentially forever.
(note that the repulsive force between degenerate electrons is different from, and much stronger than, the normal electrical repulsion between charges that have the same sign.) the electrons in a degenerate gas do move about, as do particles in any gas, but not with a lot of freedom. a particular electron cannot change position or momentum until another electron in an adjacent stage gets out of the way. the situation is much like that in the parking lot after a big football game. vehicles are closely packed, and a given car cannot move until the one in front of it moves, leaving an empty space to be filled. of course, the dying star also has atomic nuclei in it, not just electrons, but it turns out that the nuclei must be squeezed to much higher densities before their quantum nature becomes apparent. as a result, in white dwarfs, the nuclei do not exhibit degeneracy pressure. hence, in the white dwarf stage of stellar evolution, it is the degeneracy pressure of the electrons, and not of the nuclei, that halts the collapse of the core. white dwarfs white dwarfs, then, are stable, compact objects with electron-degenerate cores that cannot contract any further.
calculations showing that white dwarfs are the likely end state of low-mass stars were first carried out by the indian-american astrophysicist subrahmanyan chandrasekhar. he was able to show how much a star will shrink before the degenerate electrons halt its further contraction and hence what its final diameter will be (figure 23.2). when chandrasekhar made his calculation about white dwarfs, he found something very surprising: the radius of a white dwarf shrinks as the mass in the star increases (the larger the mass, the more tightly packed the electrons can become, resulting in a smaller radius). according to the best theoretical models, a white dwarf with a mass of about 1.4 msun or larger would have a radius of zero. what the calculations are telling us is that even the force of degenerate electrons cannot stop the collapse of a star with more mass than this. the maximum mass that a star can end its life with and still become a white dwarf—1.4 msun—is called the chandrasekhar limit. stars with end-of-life masses that exceed this limit have a different kind of end in store—one that we will explore in the next section.
23.1 • the death of low-mass stars 779 figure 23.2 relating masses and radii of white dwarfs. models of white-dwarf structure predict that as the mass of the star increases (toward the right), its radius gets smaller and smaller. subrahmanyan chandrasekhar born in 1910 in lahore, india, subrahmanyan chandrasekhar (known as chandra to his friends and colleagues) grew up in a home that encouraged scholarship and an interest in science (figure 23.3). his uncle, c. v. raman, was a physicist who won the 1930 nobel prize. a precocious student, chandra tried to read as much as he could about the latest ideas in physics and astronomy, although obtaining technical books was not easy in india at the time. he finished college at age 19 and won a scholarship to study in england. it was during the long boat voyage to get to graduate school that he first began doing calculations about the structure of white dwarf stars.