over time, the stars will drift apart. the sun was most likely born as part of an open cluster, but today, 5 billion years later, there is no evidence of what stars were part of that cluster. the pleiades, the hyades and the coat hanger are examples of open star clusters. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page297_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page297_img2.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page297_img3.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page297_img4.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 298 figure 339: m57 – the ring nebula component 131 – planetary nebulae a sun-like star has been around for billions of years. it has converted much hydrogen into helium, and much of that helium into carbon. as the amount of carbon in the core builds up, and the available helium diminishes, the pressure from fusion in the core also diminishes. local temperatures in the shell of fusing helium begin to fluctuate. as this happens the fusion in the triple-alpha process also begins to fluctuate.
there are flashes of helium fusion occurring in the helium shell. these pulses cause fluctuations in the energy output of the star which causes the outer layers of the star’s atmosphere to expand and contract. as the core continues to collapse increasing the pressure, the fluctuations continue and grow in violence, and eventually the expansion is so strong that the outer layers of the atmosphere are blown away. this entire process may take from one to two million years. the materials are ejected at speeds exceeding 100 million miles per hour. the core has now shrunk to a carbon/oxygen white dwarf. the last remnants of fusion continue. the core continues to collapse. this causes the temperature to continue to rise until the white dwarf stellar remnant is so hot that it is radiating in the ultraviolet. this radiation expands outward and ionizes the material of the ejected atmosphere. the upper mass limit for a white dwarf of 1.4 solar masses is called the chandrasekhar limit. the white dwarf remnant will cool over time and eventually become a black dwarf. this expanding shell of the ejected atmosphere continues to move outward until it is as large as our solar system.
the radiation from the remnant causes the cloud to glow, forming the objects that we see from earth, the planetary nebulae. the glow is caused by the same mechanism that makes emission nebulae glow. the nebula will expand and cool until it blends back into the local dust and gas cloud, after only a few tens of thousands of years. we have discovered over 1500 planetary nebulae in the milky way galaxy. the ring nebula, the eskimo nebula and the dumbbell nebula are examples of these. the exact shape of the planetary nebula varies widely. events in the dying star as well as the environment around it result in some that appear to be fairly spherical as well as many that are quite exotic. the name, planetary nebula, has nothing to do with planets. they were named this because when first discovered by william herschel, they resembled planets in his telescope.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page298_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 299 figure 340: the helix nebula figure 341: the eskimo nebula most white dwarf stellar remnants are made of carbon figure 342: the ant nebula during the final process of forming a planetary nebula, material from within the core is mixed with the star’s atmosphere. as the temperatures continue to rise in the core, the carbon may combine with helium to form oxygen. it is also possible for heavier atoms, such as neon and magnesium, to form. when the atmosphere is ejected into space some of these atoms leave as well. it is believed that much of the carbon located in dust clouds throughout the galaxy originated in the form of planetary nebulae. at this point, the core is about the diameter of the earth and has lost 50% of its mass in the formation of the planetary nebula. although some white dwarf stellar remnants are seen near the center of their planetary nebulae, there are also many white dwarf remnants that have been found without the shell of glowing gas. the gas has faded into the background dust cloud, or was lost to another star.