elliptical galaxies elliptical galaxies consist almost entirely of old stars and have shapes that are spheres or ellipsoids (somewhat squashed spheres) (figure 26.7). they contain no trace of spiral arms. their light is dominated by older reddish stars (the population ii stars discussed in the milky way galaxy). in the larger nearby ellipticals, many globular clusters can be identified. dust and emission nebulae are not conspicuous in elliptical galaxies, but many do contain a small amount of interstellar matter. 26.2 • types of galaxies 903 [image: astronomy_openstax_page921_img1.jpeg] figure 26.7 elliptical galaxies. (a) eso 325-g004 is a giant elliptical galaxy. other elliptical galaxies can be seen around the edges of this image. (b) this elliptical galaxy probably originated from the collision of two spiral galaxies. (credit a: modification of work by nasa, esa, and the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura); credit b: modification of work by esa/hubble, nasa) elliptical galaxies show various degrees of flattening, ranging from systems that are approximately spherical to those that approach the flatness of spirals.
the rare giant ellipticals (for example, eso 325-g004 in figure 26.7) reach luminosities of 1011 lsun. the mass in a giant elliptical can be as large as 1013 msun. the diameters of these large galaxies extend over several hundred thousand light-years and are considerably larger than the largest spirals. although individual stars orbit the center of an elliptical galaxy, the orbits are not all in the same direction, as occurs in spirals. therefore, ellipticals don’t appear to rotate in a systematic way, making it difficult to estimate how much dark matter they contain. we find that elliptical galaxies range all the way from the giants, just described, to dwarfs, which may be the most common kind of galaxy. dwarf ellipticals (sometimes called dwarf spheroidals) escaped our notice for a long time because they are very faint and difficult to see. the luminosity of this typical dwarf is about equal to that of the brightest globular clusters. intermediate between the giant and dwarf elliptical galaxies are systems such as m32 (see figure 26.8) and m110, the two companions of the andromeda galaxy.
while they are often referred to as dwarf ellipticals, these galaxies can be significantly larger than the typical dwarf galaxies. figure 26.8 dwarf elliptical galaxy. m32, a dwarf elliptical galaxy and one of the companions to the giant andromeda galaxy m31. m32 is a dwarf by galactic standards, as it is only 2400 light-years across. (credit: noao/aura/nsf) 904 26 • galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page922_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page922_img2.jpeg] irregular galaxies hubble classified galaxies that do not have the regular shapes associated with the categories we just described into the catchall bin of an irregular galaxy, and we continue to use his term. typically, irregular galaxies have lower masses and luminosities than spiral galaxies. irregular galaxies often appear disorganized, and many are undergoing relatively intense star formation activity. they contain both young population i stars and old population ii stars.
the two best-known irregular galaxies are the large magellanic cloud and small magellanic cloud (figure 26.9), which are at a distance of a little more than 160,000 light-years away and are among our nearest extragalactic neighbors. their names reflect the fact that ferdinand magellan and his crew, making their round-the-world journey, were the first european travelers to notice them. although not visible from the united states and europe, these two systems are prominent from the southern hemisphere, where they look like wispy clouds in the night sky. since they are only about one-tenth as distant as the andromeda galaxy, they present an excellent opportunity for astronomers to study nebulae, star clusters, variable stars, and other key objects in the setting of another galaxy. for example, the large magellanic cloud contains the 30 doradus complex (also known as the tarantula nebula), one of the largest and most luminous groups of supergiant stars known in any galaxy. figure 26.9 4-meter telescope at cerro tololo inter-american observatory silhouetted against the southern sky.