(a and b) m82 (smaller galaxy at top) and m83 (spiral) are seen (a) in a black-and-white visible light image and (b) in radio waves given off by cold hydrogen gas. the hydrogen image shows that the two galaxies are wrapped in a common shroud of gas that is being tugged and stretched by the gravity of the two galaxies. (c) this close-up view by the hubble space telescope shows some of the effects of this interaction on galaxy m82, including gas streaming outward (red tendrils) powered by supernovae explosions of massive stars formed in the burst of star formation that was a result of the collision. (d) galaxy ugc 10214 (“the tadpole”) is a barred spiral galaxy 420 million light-years from the milky way that has been disrupted by the passage of a smaller galaxy. the interloper’s gravity pulled out the long tidal tail, which is about 280,000 light-years long, and triggered bursts of star formation seen as blue clumps along the tail.
(e) galaxies ngc 4676 a and b are nicknamed “the mice.” in this hubble space telescope image, you can see the long, narrow tails of stars pulled away from the galaxies by the interactions of the two spirals. (f) arp 148 is a pair of galaxies that are caught in the act of merging to become one new galaxy. the two appear to have already passed through each other once, causing a shockwave that reformed one into a bright blue ring of star formation, like the ripples from a stone tossed into a pond. (credit a, b: modification of work by nrao/aui; credit c: modification of work by nasa, esa, and the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura); credit d, e: modification of work by nasa, h. ford (jhu), g. illingworth (ucsc/lo), m.clampin (stsci), g. hartig (stsci), the acs science team, and esa; credit f: modification of work by nasa, esa, the hubble heritage (stsci/aura)-esa/hubble collaboration, and a.
evans (university of virginia, charlottesville/nrao/stony brook university)) why galaxies collide but stars rarely do throughout this book we have emphasized the large distances between objects in space. you might therefore have been surprised to hear about collisions between galaxies. yet (except at the very cores of galaxies) we have not worried at all about stars inside a galaxy colliding with each other. let’s see why there is a difference. the reason is that stars are pitifully small compared to the distances between them. let’s use our sun as an example. the sun is about 1.4 million kilometers wide, but is separated from the closest other star by about 4 light-years, or about 38 trillion kilometers. in other words, the sun is 27 million of its own diameters from astronomy basics 28.2 • galaxy mergers and active galactic nuclei 965 [image: astronomy_openstax_page983_img1.jpeg] its nearest neighbor. if the sun were a grapefruit in new york city, the nearest star would be another grapefruit in san francisco. this is typical of stars that are not in the nuclear bulge of a galaxy or inside star clusters.
let’s contrast this with the separation of galaxies. the visible disk of the milky way is about 100,000 light-years in diameter. we have three satellite galaxies that are just one or two milky way diameters away from us (and will probably someday collide with us). the closest major spiral is the andromeda galaxy (m31), about 2.4 million light-years away. if the milky way were a pancake at one end of a big breakfast table, m31 would be another pancake at the other end of the same table. our nearest large galaxy neighbor is only 24 of our galaxy’s diameters from us, and it will begin to crash into the milky way in about 4.5 billion years. galaxies in rich clusters are even closer together than those in our neighborhood (see the distribution of galaxies in space). thus, the chances of galaxies colliding are far greater than the chances of stars in the disk of a galaxy colliding. and we should note that the difference between the separation of galaxies and stars also means that when galaxies do collide, their stars almost always pass right by each other like smoke passing through a screen door.