link to learning 4.7 • eclipses of the sun and moon 131 [image: astronomy_openstax_page149_img1.jpeg] key terms apparent solar time time as measured by the position of the sun in the sky (the time that would be indicated by a sundial) declination the angular distance north or south of the celestial equator great circle a circle on the surface of a sphere that is the curve of intersection of the sphere with a plane passing through its center international date line an arbitrary line on the surface of earth near longitude 180° across which the date changes by one day lunar eclipse an eclipse of the moon, in which the moon moves into the shadow of earth; lunar eclipses can occur only at the time of full moon mean solar time time based on the rotation of earth; mean solar time passes at a constant rate, unlike apparent solar time meridian a great circle on the terrestrial or celestial sphere that passes through the poles phases of the moon the different appearance of light and dark on the moon as seen from earth during its monthly cycle, from new moon to full moon and back to new moon right ascension the coordinate for measuring the east-west positions of celestial bodies; the angle measured eastward along the celestial equator from the vernal equinox to the hour circle passing through a body sidereal day earth’s rotation period as defined by the positions of the stars in the sky; the time between successive passages of the same star through the meridian sidereal month the period of the moon’s revolution about earth measured with respect to the stars solar day earth’s rotation period as defined by the position of the sun in the sky; the time between successive passages of the sun through the meridian solar eclipse an eclipse of the sun by the moon, caused by the passage of the moon in front of the sun; solar eclipses can occur only at the time of the new moon solar month the time interval in which the phases repeat—say, from full to full phase synchronous rotation when a body (for example, the moon) rotates at the same rate that it revolves around another body tides alternate rising and falling of sea level caused by the difference in the strength of the moon’s gravitational pull on different parts of earth summary 4.1 earth and sky the terrestrial system of latitude and longitude makes use of the great circles called meridians.
longitude is arbitrarily set to 0° at the royal observatory at greenwich, england. an analogous celestial coordinate system is called right ascension (ra) and declination, with 0° of declination starting at the vernal equinox. these coordinate systems help us locate any object on the celestial sphere. the foucault pendulum is a way to demonstrate that earth is turning. 4.2 the seasons the familiar cycle of the seasons results from the 23.5° tilt of earth’s axis of rotation. at the summer solstice, the sun is higher in the sky and its rays strike earth more directly. the sun is in the sky for more than half of the day and can heat earth longer. at the winter solstice, the sun is low in the sky and its rays come in at more of an angle; in addition, it is up for fewer than 12 hours, so those rays have less time to heat. at the vernal and autumnal equinoxes, the sun is on the celestial equator and we get about 12 hours of day and night. the seasons are different at different latitudes.
132 4 • key terms access for free at openstax.org 4.3 keeping time the basic unit of astronomical time is the day—either the solar day (reckoned by the sun) or the sidereal day (reckoned by the stars). apparent solar time is based on the position of the sun in the sky, and mean solar time is based on the average value of a solar day during the year. by international agreement, we define 24 time zones around the world, each with its own standard time. the convention of the international date line is necessary to reconcile times on different parts of earth. 4.4 the calendar the fundamental problem of the calendar is to reconcile the incommensurable lengths of the day, month, and year. most modern calendars, beginning with the roman (julian) calendar of the first century bce, neglect the problem of the month and concentrate on achieving the correct number of days in a year by using such conventions as the leap year. today, most of the world has adopted the gregorian calendar established in 1582 while finding ways to coexist with the older lunar calendars’ system of months.