this table shows that the most massive stars spend only a few million years on the main sequence. a star of 1 solar mass remains there for roughly 10 billion years, while a star of about 0.4 solar mass has a main-sequence lifetime of some 200 billion years, which is longer than the current age of the universe. (bear in mind, however, that every star spends most of its total lifetime on the main sequence.
stars devote an average of 90% of their lives to peacefully fusing hydrogen into helium.) lifetimes of main-sequence stars spectral type surface temperature (k) mass (mass of sun = 1) lifetime on main sequence (years) o5 54,000 40 1 million b0 29,200 16 10 million a0 9600 3.3 500 million f0 7350 1.7 2.7 billion g0 6050 1.1 9 billion table 22.1 22.1 • evolution from the main sequence to red giants 743 spectral type surface temperature (k) mass (mass of sun = 1) lifetime on main sequence (years) k0 5240 0.8 14 billion m0 3750 0.4 200 billion table 22.1 these results are not merely of academic interest. human beings developed on a planet around a g-type star. this means that the sun’s stable main-sequence lifetime is so long that it afforded life on earth plenty of time to evolve.
when searching for intelligent life like our own on planets around other stars, it would be a pretty big waste of time to search around o- or b-type stars. these stars remain stable for such a short time that the development of creatures complicated enough to take astronomy courses is very unlikely. from main-sequence star to red giant eventually, all the hydrogen in a star’s core, where it is hot enough for fusion reactions, is used up. the core then contains only helium, “contaminated” by whatever small percentage of heavier elements the star had to begin with. the helium in the core can be thought of as the accumulated “ash” from the nuclear “burning” of hydrogen during the main-sequence stage. energy can no longer be generated by hydrogen fusion in the stellar core because the hydrogen is all gone and, as we will see, the fusion of helium requires much higher temperatures. since the central temperature is not yet high enough to fuse helium, there is no nuclear energy source to supply heat to the central region of the star. the long period of stability now ends, gravity again takes over, and the core begins to contract.
once more, the star’s energy is partially supplied by gravitational energy, in the way described by kelvin and helmholtz (see sources of sunshine: thermal and gravitational energy). as the star’s core shrinks, the energy of the inward-falling material is converted to heat. the heat generated in this way, like all heat, flows outward to where it is a bit cooler. in the process, the heat raises the temperature of a layer of hydrogen that spent the whole long main-sequence time just outside the core. like an understudy waiting in the wings of a hit broadway show for a chance at fame and glory, this hydrogen was almost (but not quite) hot enough to undergo fusion and take part in the main action that sustains the star. now, the additional heat produced by the shrinking core puts this hydrogen “over the limit,” and a shell of hydrogen nuclei just outside the core becomes hot enough for hydrogen fusion to begin. new energy produced by fusion of this hydrogen now pours outward from this shell and begins to heat up layers of the star farther out, causing them to expand. meanwhile, the helium core continues to contract, producing more heat right around it.