consequently, in order to address the mystery of the absent companion stars and other outstanding puzzles, astronomers have recently begun to investigate alternative mechanisms of generating type ia supernovae. all proposed mechanisms rely upon white dwarfs composed of carbon and oxygen, which are needed to meet the observed absence of hydrogen in the type ia spectrum. and because any isolated white dwarf below the chandrasekhar mass is stable, all proposed mechanisms invoke a binary companion to explode the white 804 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page822_img1.jpeg] dwarf. the leading alternative mechanism scientists believe creates a type ia supernova is the merger of two white dwarf stars in a binary system. the two white dwarfs may have unstable orbits, such that over time, they would slowly move closer together until they merge. if their combined mass is greater than the chandrasekhar limit, the result could also be a type ia supernova explosion.
you can watch a short video (https://openstax.org/l/30supernovavid) about supernova sn 2014j, a type ia supernova discovered in the messier 82 (m82) galaxy on january 21, 2014, as well as see brief animations of the two mechanisms by which such a supernova could form. type ia supernovae are of great interest to astronomers in other areas of research. this type of supernova is brighter than supernovae produced by the collapse of a massive star. thus, type ia supernovae can be seen at very large distances, and they are found in all types of galaxies. the energy output from most type ia supernovae is consistent, with little variation in their maximum luminosities, or in how their light output initially increases and then slowly decreases over time. these properties make type ia supernovae extremely valuable “standard bulbs” for astronomers looking out at great distances—well beyond the limits of our own galaxy. you’ll learn more about their use in measuring distances to other galaxies in the big bang.
in contrast, type ii supernovae are about 5 times less luminous than type ia supernovae and are only seen in galaxies that have recent, massive star formation. type ii supernovae are also less consistent in their energy output during the explosion and can have a range a peak luminosity values. neutron stars with companions now let’s look at an even-more mismatched pair of stars in action. it is possible that, under the right circumstances, a binary system can even survive the explosion of one of its members as a type ii supernova. in that case, an ordinary star can eventually share a system with a neutron star. if material is then transferred from the “living” star to its “dead” (and highly compressed) companion, this material will be pulled in by the strong gravity of the neutron star. such infalling gas will be compressed and heated to incredible temperatures. it will quickly become so hot that it will experience an explosive burst of fusion. the energies involved are so great that we would expect much of the radiation from the burst to emerge as x-rays. and indeed, high-energy observatories above earth’s atmosphere (see astronomical instruments) have recorded many objects that undergo just these types of x-ray bursts.
if the neutron star and its companion are positioned the right way, a significant amount of material can be transferred to the neutron star and can set it spinning faster (as spin energy is also transferred). the radius of the neutron star would also decrease as more mass was added. astronomers have found pulsars in binary systems that are spinning at a rate of more than 500 times per second! (these are sometimes called millisecond pulsars since the pulses are separated by a few thousandths of a second.) such a rapid spin could not have come from the birth of the neutron star; it must have been externally caused. (recall that the crab nebula pulsar, one of the youngest pulsars known, was spinning “only” 30 times per second.) indeed, some of the fast pulsars are observed to be part of binary systems, while others may be alone only because they have “fully consumed” their former partner stars through the mass transfer process. (these have sometimes been called “black widow pulsars.”) link to learning 23.5 • the evolution of binary star systems 805 view this short video (https://openstax.org/l/30scotronvid) to see dr.