halley was 14 years younger than newton, and had been a member of the royal society of london for improvement of natural knowledge since 1678. this was several years after newton had distanced himself from the royal society and its members because of a dispute over his theory of colors, which he submitted as a letter to them early in 1672. just one month before, members of the royal society first became aware of isaac newton because of his telescope. this is a drawing made in london after they first used it. (newton’s reflector is about 6 inches long.) needless to say, the new telescope was a sensation, and newton went from being an obscure cambridge scholar to an internationally known natural philosopher. but the theory of colors, based on his work with a prism and the refraction of sunlight, met with considerable resistance. from 1665 until his coming out in 1672, newton’s work in mathematics and optics was known only to a handful of scholars in cambridge, the most important of which was the lucasian professor of mathematics, isaac barrow.
barrow had done important work in both subjects, but quickly realized that newton [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page445_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page445_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 446 figure 488: principia mathematica public domain had gone well past him. when barrow was offered the position of chaplain to the king in 1669, he nominated as his replacement the obscure and secretive isaac newton. (the current lucasian professor is sir stephen hawking.) he built his telescope that same year, but was timid in going public. not until late 1671 did he allow anyone outside of cambridge to see it or talk about it, but he gradually warmed to the universal praise it received. but when he sent in the letter to the royal society in which he showed that white light is an amalgam of colored light, and that the individual colors themselves could not be refined any further, he met with many objections. his response was to withdraw again, and he would remain out of the limelight until halley approached him in 1684.
figure 487 shows newton’s own sketch of his apparatus and the bottom version shows how it appeared in the second french edition of his optique (optics, 1722). the printed version is reversed, but they show the same setup: sunlight enters at the left, passes through a lens and then passes through a prism. some of the light continues down to the right, the rest is refracted and appears as a vertical band of colors, a spectrum, on the screen at the right. the screen itself has a hole through which one of the colors is allowed to pass and is refracted through a second prism behind the screen. that light hits the wall at the upper right, and is still the same color, proving that the colored light is primary, while sunlight is not. this scientific study of spectra launched by newton in the optics marked the beginning of a new analytical technique, spectroscopy, which would prove invaluable for physics, chemistry and astronomy. the dozen years between the letter on optics and halley’s overture in 1684 newton spent on alchemy and unorthodox theology. but halley’s question stirred him to reconsider scientific problems.
what started out as a fairly simple monograph blossomed into a full-blown book, with axioms, postulates, and proofs, dealing with everything from terrestrial motion to planetary astronomy. the key finding was his proof that galileo’s analysis of falling bodies due to gravity applies to all bodies, including the planets. the law of gravity, where m1 and m2 are the masses of two bodies, r is the distance between them, and g is a constant, gives the force due to gravity. since the force law applied to any two bodies, it was universal. the same physical laws that applied to objects here on the earth also [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page446_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page446_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 447 figure 489: gravity public domain applied to objects in the heavens. the ancient precept that held that the sub-lunary realm was the region of all ephemeral impurity, and that the heavens were eternally perfect, was finally dealt a death blow.