short animation, in several formats, to show the big dipper between 100,000 bc and 100,000 ad. stellar spectroscopy: what we can learn about the stars: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=om5leg2woa0 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=om5leg2woa0). an introduction by an enthusiastic australian physics teacher (16:44). understanding the magnitude system for stars: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9p8veb_alj0 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9p8veb_alj0). an introduction by amateur astronomer robert fuller (5:32). unraveling starlight: william and margaret huggins and the rise of the new astronomy: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=awdkuegyuqw (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=awdkuegyuqw). a nontechnical talk by dr. barbara becker, astronomy historian, who wrote a book by that title (51:52).
when you are just too small to be a star: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zxcdsb4n4ku (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zxcdsb4n4ku). 2013 public talk on brown dwarfs and planets by dr. gibor basri of the university of california–berkeley (1:32:52). collaborative group activities a. the voyagers in astronomy feature on annie cannon: classifier of the stars discusses some of the difficulties women who wanted to do astronomy faced in the first half of the twentieth century. what does your group think about the situation for women today? do men and women have an equal chance to become scientists? discuss with your group whether, in your experience, boys and girls were equally encouraged to do science and math where you went to school. b. in the section on magnitudes in the brightness of stars, we discussed how this old system of classifying how bright different stars appear to the eye first developed. your authors complained about the fact that this old system still has to be taught to every generation of new students. can your group think of any other traditional systems of doing things in science and measurement where tradition rules even though common sense says a better system could certainly be found. explain.
(hint: try daylight savings time, or metric versus english units.) c. suppose you could observe a star that has only one spectral line. could you tell what element that spectral line comes from? make a list of reasons with your group about why you answered yes or no. d. a wealthy alumnus of your college decides to give $50 million to the astronomy department to build a world-class observatory for learning more about the characteristics of stars. have your group discuss what 17 • collaborative group activities 597 kind of equipment they would put in the observatory. where should this observatory be located? justify your answers. (you may want to refer back to the astronomical instruments chapter and to revisit this question as you learn more about the stars and equipment for observing them in future chapters.) e. for some astronomers, introducing a new spectral type for the stars (like the types l, t, and y discussed in the text) is similar to introducing a new area code for telephone calls. no one likes to disrupt the old system, but sometimes it is simply necessary. have your group make a list of steps an astronomer would have to go through to persuade colleagues that a new spectral class is needed. exercises review questions 1.
what two factors determine how bright a star appears to be in the sky? 2. explain why color is a measure of a star’s temperature. 3. what is the main reason that the spectra of all stars are not identical? explain. 4. what elements are stars mostly made of? how do we know this? 5. what did annie cannon contribute to the understanding of stellar spectra? 6. name five characteristics of a star that can be determined by measuring its spectrum. explain how you would use a spectrum to determine these characteristics. 7. how do objects of spectral types l, t, and y differ from those of the other spectral types? 8. do stars that look brighter in the sky have larger or smaller magnitudes than fainter stars? 9. the star antares has an apparent magnitude of 1.0, whereas the star procyon has an apparent magnitude of 0.4. which star appears brighter in the sky? 10. based on their colors, which of the following stars is hottest? which is coolest? archenar (blue), betelgeuse (red), capella (yellow). 11. order the seven basic spectral types from hottest to coldest. 12.