much of the recent work on the evolution of galaxies has progressed by studying a few specific small regions of the sky where the hubble, spitzer, jwst, and ground-based telescopes have taken extremely long exposure images. this allowed astronomers to detect very faint, very distant, and therefore very young galaxies (figure 28.4). our deep space telescope images show some galaxies that are 100 times fainter than the faintest objects that can be observed spectroscopically with today’s giant ground-based telescopes. this turns out to mean that we can obtain the spectra needed to determine redshifts for only the very brightest five percent of the galaxies in these images. 960 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org figure 28.4 hubble ultra-deep field. this image is the result of an 11-day-long observation with the hubble space telescope of a tiny region of sky, located toward the constellation fornax near the south celestial pole. this is an area that has only a handful of milky way stars.
(since the hubble orbits earth every 96 minutes, the telescope returned to view the same tiny piece of sky over and over again until enough light was collected and added together to make this very long exposure.) there are about 10,000 objects in this single image, nearly all of them galaxies, each with tens or hundreds of billions of stars. we can see some pinwheel-shaped spiral galaxies, which are like the milky way. but we also find a large variety of peculiar-shaped galaxies that are in collision with companion galaxies. elliptical galaxies, which contain mostly old stars, appear as reddish blobs. (credit: modification of work by nasa, esa, h. teplitz and m. rafelski (ipac/caltech), a. koekemoer (stsci), r. windhorst (arizona state university), and z. levay (stsci)) although we do not have spectra for most of the faint galaxies, the hubble space telescope has been used to study the shapes of a large number of very distant galaxies. it can do this because the images taken in space are not blurred by the earth's atmosphere. to the surprise of astronomers, the distant galaxies did not fit hubble’s classification scheme at all.
remember that hubble found that nearly all nearby galaxies could be classified into a few categories, depending on whether they were ellipticals or spirals. the distant galaxies observed by the hubble space telescope look very different from present-day galaxies, without identifiable spiral arms, disks, and bulges (figure 28.5). they also tend to be much clumpier than most galaxies today. in other words, it’s becoming clear that the shapes of galaxies have changed significantly over time. in fact, we now know that the hubble scheme works well for only the last half of the age of the universe. before then, galaxies were much more chaotic. 28.1 • observations of distant galaxies 961 [image: astronomy_openstax_page979_img1.jpeg] figure 28.5 early galaxies. this hubble space telescope image shows what are probably “galaxies under construction” in the early universe. the boxes in this color image show enlargements of 18 groups of stars smaller than galaxies as we know them. all these objects emitted their light about 11 billion years ago. they are typically only about 2,000 light-years across, which is much smaller than the milky way, with its diameter of 100,000 light-years.
these 18 objects are found in a region only 2 million light-years across and are close enough together that they will probably collide and merge to build one or more normal galaxies. (credit: modification of work by rogier windhorst (arizona state university) and nasa) it’s not just the shapes that are different. nearly all the galaxies with red-shifts that correspond to 11 billion light-years or more—that is, galaxies that we are seeing when they were less than 3 billion years old—are extremely blue, indicating that they contain a lot of young stars and that star formation in them is occurring at a higher rate than in nearby galaxies. observations also show that very distant galaxies are systematically smaller on average than nearby galaxies. relatively few galaxies present before the universe was about 8 billion years old have masses greater than 1011 msun. that’s 1/20 the mass of the milky way if we include its dark matter halo. eleven billion years ago, there were only a few galaxies with masses greater than 1010 msun. what we see instead seem to be small pieces or fragments of galactic material (figure 28.6).