(a) the (visible light) image, taken with the hubble space telescope, shows bright sirius a, and, below it and off to its left, faint sirius b. (b) this image of the sirius star system was taken with the chandra x-ray telescope. now, the bright object is the white dwarf companion, sirius b. sirius a is the faint object above it; what we are seeing from sirius is probably not actually x-ray radiation but rather ultraviolet light that has leaked into the detector. note that the ultraviolet intensities of these two objects are completely reversed from the situation in visible light because sirius b is hotter and emits more higher-frequency radiation. (credit a: modification of work by nasa, h.e. bond and e. nelan (space telescope science institute), m. barstow and m. burleigh (university of leicester) and j.b. holberg (university of arizona); credit b: modification of work by nasa/sao/cxc) we have now found thousands of white dwarfs. table 18.1 shows that about 7% of the true stars (spectral types o–m) in our local neighborhood are white dwarfs.
a good example of a typical white dwarf is the nearby star 40 eridani b. its surface temperature is a relatively hot 12,000 k, but its luminosity is only 1/275 lsun. calculations show that its radius is only 1.4% of the sun’s, or about the same as that of earth, and its volume is 2.5 × 10–6 that of the sun. its mass, however, is 0.57 times the sun’s mass, just a little more than half. to fit such a substantial mass into so tiny a volume, the star’s density must be about 210,000 times the density of the sun, or more than 300,000 g/cm3. a teaspoonful of this material would have a mass of some 1.6 tons! at such enormous densities, matter cannot exist in its usual state; we will examine the particular behavior of this type of matter in the death of stars. for now, we just note that white dwarfs are dying stars, reaching the end of their productive lives and ready for their stories to be over.
the british astrophysicist (and science popularizer) arthur eddington (1882–1944) described the first known white dwarf this way: the message of the companion of sirius, when decoded, ran: “i am composed of material three thousand times denser than anything you’ve ever come across. a ton of my material would be a little nugget you could put in a matchbox.” what reply could one make to something like that? well, the reply most of us made in 1914 was, “shut up; don’t talk nonsense.” today, however, astronomers not only accept that stars as dense as white dwarfs exist but (as we will see) have found even denser and stranger objects in their quest to understand the evolution of different types of stars. use this interactive h-r diagram (https://openstax.org/l/30interhr) to explore the sizes of stars based on their placement. overlay the closest stars and the brightest stars, and consider where they lie on the figure. how many stars are among both the closest and brightest stars?