recently, as we have already noted, astronomers have discovered a few galaxies that are so far away that the light we see now left them less than a billion years or so after the beginning (figure 28.3). yet the spectra of some of these galaxies already contain lines of heavy elements, including carbon, silicon, aluminum, and sulfur. these elements were not present when the universe began but had to be manufactured in the interiors of stars. this means that when the light from these galaxies was emitted, an entire generation of stars had already been born, lived out their lives, and died—spewing out the new elements made in their interiors through supernova explosions—even before the universe was a billion years old. and it wasn’t just a few stars in each galaxy that got started this way. enough had to live and die to affect the overall composition of the galaxy, in a way that we can still measure in the spectrum from far away. figure 28.3 very distant galaxy. this image was made with the hubble space telescope and shows the field around a luminous galaxy at a redshift z = 8.68, which corresponds to 13.2 billion light years.
this means that we are seeing this galaxy as it appeared about 13.2 billion years ago. the galaxy itself is indicated by the arrow. long exposures in the far-red and infrared wavelengths were combined to make the image, and additional infrared exposures with the spitzer space telescope, which has lower spatial resolution than the hubble (lower inset), show the redshifted light of normal stars. the very distant galaxy was detected because it has a strong emission line of hydrogen. this line is produced in regions where the formation of hot, young stars is taking place. (credit: modification of work by i. labbé (leiden university), nasa/esa/jpl-caltech) observations of quasars (galaxies whose centers contain an active supermassive black hole radiating a great deal of energy) support this conclusion. we can measure the abundances of heavy elements in the gas near 28.1 • observations of distant galaxies 959 [image: astronomy_openstax_page977_img1.jpeg] quasar black holes (explained in active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes). the composition of this gas in quasars that emitted their light 12.5 billion light-years ago is very similar to that of the sun.
this means that a large portion of the gas surrounding the black holes must have already been cycled through stars during the first 1.3 billion years after the expansion of the universe began. if we allow time for this cycling, then their first stars must have formed when the universe was only a few hundred million years old. a changing universe of galaxies back in the middle decades of the twentieth century, the observation that all galaxies contain some old stars led astronomers to the hypothesis that galaxies were born fully formed near the time when the universe began its expansion. this hypothesis was similar to suggesting that human beings were born as adults and did not have to pass through the various stages of development from infancy through the teens. if this hypothesis were correct, the most distant galaxies should have shapes and sizes very much like the galaxies we see nearby. according to this old view, galaxies, after they formed, should then change only slowly, as successive generations of stars within them formed, evolved, and died. as the interstellar matter was slowly used up and fewer new stars formed, the galaxies would gradually become dominated by fainter, older stars and look dimmer and dimmer.
thanks to the new generation of large ground- and space-based telescopes, we now know that this picture of galaxies evolving peacefully and in isolation from one another is completely wrong. as we will see later in this chapter, galaxies in the distant universe do not look like the milky way and nearby galaxies such as andromeda, and the story of their development is more complex and involves far more interaction with their neighbors. why were astronomers so wrong? up until the early 1990s, the most distant normal galaxy that had been observed emitted its light 8 billion years ago. during the last 8 billion years, many galaxies—and particularly the giant ellipticals, which are the most luminous and therefore the easiest to see at large distances—did evolve peacefully and slowly. but the hubble, spitzer, herschel, keck, and now jwst, all of which have come on line since the 1990s, make it possible to pierce the 8-billion-light-year barrier. we now have detailed views of many thousands of galaxies that emitted their light much earlier (some more than 13 billion years ago—see figure 28.3).