would you more likely be successful if you observed at visible wavelengths or at infrared wavelengths? why? 23. thinking about the topics in this chapter, here is an earth analogy. in big cities, you can see much farther on days without smog. why? 24. stars form in the milky way at a rate of about 1 solar mass per year. at this rate, how long would it take for all the interstellar gas in the milky way to be turned into stars if there were no fresh gas coming in from outside? how does this compare to the estimated age of the universe, 14 billion years? what do you conclude from this? 25. the 21-cm line can be used not just to find out where hydrogen is located in the sky, but also to determine how fast it is moving toward or away from us. describe how this might work. 26. astronomers recently detected light emitted by a supernova that was originally observed in 1572, just reaching earth now. this light was reflected off a dust cloud; astronomers call such a reflected light a “light echo” (just like reflected sound is called an echo).
how would you expect the spectrum of the light echo to compare to that of the original supernova? 27. we can detect 21-cm emission from other galaxies as well as from our own galaxy. however, 21-cm emission from our own galaxy fills most of the sky, so we usually see both at once. how can we distinguish the extragalactic 21-cm emission from that arising in our own galaxy? (hint: other galaxies are generally moving relative to the milky way.) 28. we have said repeatedly that blue light undergoes more extinction than red light, which is true for visible and shorter wavelengths. is the same true for x-rays? look at figure 20.19. the most dust is in the galactic plane in the middle of the image, and the red color in the image corresponds to the reddest (lowest- energy) light. based on what you see in the galactic plane, are x-rays experiencing more extinction at redder or bluer colors? you might consider comparing figure 20.19 to figure 20.14. 29. suppose that, instead of being inside the local bubble, the sun were deep inside a giant molecular cloud.
what would the night sky look like as seen from earth at various wavelengths? 30. suppose that, instead of being inside the local bubble, the sun were inside an h ii region. what would the night sky look like at various wavelengths? figuring for yourself 31. a molecular cloud is about 1000 times denser than the average of the interstellar medium. let’s compare 20 • exercises 697 this difference in densities to something more familiar. air has a density of about 1 kg/m3, so something 1000 times denser than air would have a density of about 1000 kg/m3. how does this compare to the typical density of water? of granite? (you can find figures for these densities on the internet.) is the density difference between a molecular cloud and the interstellar medium larger or smaller than the density difference between air and water or granite? 32. would you expect to be able to detect an h ii region in x-ray emission? why or why not? (hint: you might apply wien’s law) 33. suppose that you gathered a ball of interstellar gas that was equal to the size of earth (a radius of about 6000 km).
if this gas has a density of 1 hydrogen atom per cm3, typical of the interstellar medium, how would its mass compare to the mass of a bowling ball (5 or 6 kg)? how about if it had the typical density of the local bubble, about 0.01 atoms per cm3? the volume of a sphere is v = (4/3)πr3. 34. at the average density of the interstellar medium, 1 atom per cm3, how big a volume of material must be used to make a star with the mass of the sun? what is the radius of a sphere this size? express your answer in light-years. 35. consider a grain of sand that contains 1 mg of oxygen (a typical amount for a medium-sized sand grain, since sand is mostly sio2). how many oxygen atoms does the grain contain? what is the radius of the sphere you would have to spread them out over if you wanted them to have the same density as the interstellar medium, about 1 atom per cm3? you can look up the mass of an oxygen atom. 36. h ii regions can exist only if there is a nearby star hot enough to ionize hydrogen.