link to learning 21.6 • new perspectives on planet formation 733 [image: astronomy_openstax_page751_img1.jpeg] key terms exoplanet a planet orbiting a star other than our sun giant molecular clouds large, cold interstellar clouds with diameters of dozens of light-years and typical masses of 105 solar masses; found in the spiral arms of galaxies, these clouds are where stars form herbig-haro (hh) object luminous knots of gas in an area of star formation that are set to glow by jets of material from a protostar mini-neptune a planet that is intermediate between the largest terrestrial planet in our solar system (earth) and the smallest jovian planet (neptune); generally, mini-neptunes have sizes between 2.8 and 4 times earth’s size protostar a very young star still in the process of formation, before nuclear fusion begins stellar wind the outflow of gas, sometimes at speeds as high as hundreds of kilometers per second, from a star super-earth a planet larger than earth, generally between 1.4 and 2.8 times the size of our planet transit when one astronomical object moves in front of another summary 21.1 star formation most stars form in giant molecular clouds with masses as large as 3 × 106 solar masses.
the most well-studied molecular cloud is orion, where star formation is currently taking place. molecular clouds typically contain regions of higher density called clumps, which in turn contain several even-denser cores of gas and dust, each of which may become a star. a star can form inside a core if its density is high enough that gravity can overwhelm the internal pressure and cause the gas and dust to collapse. the accumulation of material halts when a protostar develops a strong stellar wind, leading to jets of material being observed coming from the star. these jets of material can collide with the material around the star and produce regions that emit light that are known as herbig-haro objects. 21.2 the h–r diagram and the study of stellar evolution the evolution of a star can be described in terms of changes in its temperature and luminosity, which can best be followed by plotting them on an h–r diagram. protostars generate energy (and internal heat) through gravitational contraction that typically continues for millions of years, until the star reaches the main sequence.
21.3 evidence that planets form around other stars observational evidence shows that most protostars are surrounded by disks with large-enough diameters and enough mass (as much as 10% that of the sun) to form planets. after a few million years, the inner part of the disk is cleared of dust, and the disk is then shaped like a donut with the protostar centered in the hole—something that can be explained by the formation of planets in that inner zone. around a few older stars, we see disks formed from the debris produced when small bodies (comets and asteroids) collide with each other. the distribution of material in the rings of debris disks is probably determined by shepherd planets, just as saturn’s shepherd moons affect the orbits of the material in its rings. protoplanets that grow to be 10 times the mass of earth or bigger while there is still considerable gas in their disk can then capture more of that gas and become giant planets like jupiter in the solar system. 21.4 planets beyond the solar system: search and discovery several observational techniques have successfully detected planets orbiting other stars. these techniques fall into two general categories—direct and indirect detection.
the doppler and transit techniques are our most powerful indirect tools for finding exoplanets. some planets are also being found by direct imaging. 734 21 • key terms access for free at openstax.org 21.5 exoplanets everywhere: what we are learning the kepler mission found thousands of new exoplanets, although these were limited to orbital periods of less than 400 days and sizes larger than mars. other missions are now continuing the search for exoplanets. still, we can use the kepler discoveries to extrapolate the size distribution of planets in our galaxy. the data so far imply that there may be more planets in the galaxy than stars. about 1000 planetary systems have so far been discovered around other stars (where a star is surrounded by more than one planet). in many of them, planets are arranged differently than in our solar system. 21.6 new perspectives on planet formation the ensemble of exoplanets is incredibly diverse and has led to a revision in our understanding of planet formation that includes the possibility of vigorous, chaotic interactions, with planet migration and scattering. it is possible that the solar system is unusual (and not representative) in how its planets are arranged.