the average temperature at the surface of the sun, which is where the radiation that we see is emitted, turns out to be 5800 k. (throughout this text, we use the kelvin or absolute temperature scale. on this scale, water freezes at 273 k and boils at 373 k. all molecular motion ceases at 0 k. the various temperature scales are described in appendix d.) there are stars cooler than the sun and stars hotter than the sun. the wavelength at which maximum power is emitted can be calculated according to the equation where the wavelength is in nanometers (one billionth of a meter) and the temperature is in k (the constant ). this relationship is called wien’s law. for the sun, the wavelength at which the maximum energy is emitted is 520 nanometers, which is near the middle of that portion of the electromagnetic spectrum called visible light. characteristic temperatures of other astronomical objects, and the wavelengths at which they emit most of their power, are listed in table 5.1. e x a m p l e 5 . 3 calculating the temperature of a blackbody we can use wien’s law to calculate the temperature of a star provided we know the wavelength of peak intensity for its spectrum.
if the emitted radiation from a red dwarf star has a wavelength of maximum power at 1200 nm, what is the temperature of this star, assuming it is a blackbody? solution solving wien’s law for temperature gives: check your learning what is the temperature of a star whose maximum light is emitted at a much shorter wavelength of 290 nm? answer: since this star has a peak wavelength that is at a shorter wavelength (in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum) than that of our sun (in the visible part of the spectrum), it should come as no surprise that its surface temperature is much hotter than our sun’s. we can also describe our observation that hotter objects radiate more power at all wavelengths in a mathematical form. if we sum up the contributions from all parts of the electromagnetic spectrum, we obtain the total energy emitted by a blackbody. what we usually measure from a large object like a star is the energy flux, the power emitted per square meter. the word flux means “flow” here: we are interested in the flow of 154 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org power into an area (like the area of a telescope mirror).
it turns out that the energy flux from a blackbody at temperature t is proportional to the fourth power of its absolute temperature. this relationship is known as the stefan-boltzmann law and can be written in the form of an equation as where f stands for the energy flux (in units of watts per square meter), t is given in kelvins, and σ (greek letter sigma) is a constant number . notice how impressive this result is. increasing the temperature of a star would have a tremendous effect on the power it radiates. if the sun, for example, were twice as hot—that is, if it had a temperature of 11,600 k—it would radiate 24, or 16 times more power than it does now. tripling the temperature would raise the power output 81 times. hot stars really shine away a tremendous amount of energy. e x a m p l e 5 . 4 calculating the power of a star while energy flux tells us how much power a star emits per square meter, we would often like to know how much total power is emitted by the star. we can determine that by multiplying the energy flux by the number of square meters on the surface of the star.
stars are mostly spherical, so we can use the formula for the surface area, where r is the radius of the star. the total power emitted by the star (which we call the star’s “absolute luminosity”) can be found by multiplying the formula for energy flux and the formula for the surface area: two stars have the same size and are the same distance from us. star a has a surface temperature of 6000 k, and star b has a surface temperature twice as high, 12,000 k. how much more luminous is star b compared to star a? solution take the ratio of the luminosity of star a to star b: because the two stars are the same size, ra = rb, leaving check your learning two stars with identical diameters are the same distance away. one has a temperature of 8700 k and the other has a temperature of 2900 k. which is brighter? how much brighter is it? answer: the 8700 k star has triple the temperature, so it is 34 = 81 times brighter.