filaments areas in the universe where there seem to be strings of galaxies between which there are voids. flares short lived loops and sheets of material rising above the sun. they may only last a few minutes. flatness problem if the universe is curved, why does it appear to be so flat? fly-by a mission for a spacecraft designed to fly past on object in space without landing or going into orbit around that object. focus (ellipse) one of the two points inside an elliptical orbit that both objects actually orbit around (the sun and the earth, or the earth and the moon, etc.). focus (telescope) the place in the light path in a telescope where the image is clear, due to curvature in the lenses and mirrors. forbidden lines these are spectral lines that appear in nebulae but are not visible in laboratories on earth. frequency the number of crests that pass by a point as the wave moves, per second. fusion the combination of smaller building blocks to form heavier atoms. galactic bulge the central part of a spiral galaxy that bugles out from the galactic disk. galactic disk the flat part of a spiral galaxy where the arms are. this is where the solar system is located in the milky way galaxy.
galactic epoch from 200 million years to 3 billion years after the big bang. this is the time when large scale structure of the universe formed (galaxies and larger). galactic halo the sphere around a galaxy. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 402 galaxy a very large collection of stars, all gravitationally bound together and orbiting a central black hole (usually). there are from millions to trillions of stars. galaxy cluster a group of galaxies that are gravitationally bound together. galaxy evolution the process by which a galaxy evolves through mergers from a small irregular galaxy, to one with a central black hole, then to a quasar, then to a radio galaxy or a seyfert galaxy, and finally into the elliptical and spiral galaxies we see today. galilean moons jupiter’s four large moons that are visible from earth in a pair of binoculars: io, europa, ganymede, and callisto. gamma ray bursts one of the most violent events in the universe. astronomers are not sure whether they are due to the merger of two neutron stars in a binary star system or if it is due to a stalled supernova restarting.
gamma ray observatory an observatory designed to detect electromagnetic radiation in the gamma ray part of the spectrum. note these instruments do not focus the gamma rays. they are not really a telescope. gamma rays the shortest wavelengths in the spectrum. ganymede jupiter’s third galilean moon. like europa, it may have a large subsurface liquid ocean. general theory of relativity the scientific theory developed by einstein that redefines the nature of gravity. geocentric the theory that the earth is the center of the universe and that all objects orbit around the earth. globular clusters star clusters that often have millions of stars. they are as old as the galaxy and look like snowballs of stars. gravitational redshift a redshift in light that is emitted in the vicinity of a large mass due to the curvature of space. gravity the force of attraction between two objects. gravity one of the fundamental forces. it affects everything. gravitons are the transfer particle for the gravitational force. great red spot this is a large hurricane-like storm that has been raging on jupiter for over 300 years. greenhouse effect the ability of the atmosphere to act like a greenhouse and trap infrared radiation thereby smoothing out atmospheric temperature changes.
this is responsible for nights being only a little bit cooler than days, but can also cause a dramatic increase in average surface temperature (see venus). greenhouse gases molecules in the earth’s atmosphere that capture infrared astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 403 radiation causing the greenhouse effect. they include carbon dioxide and many complex hydrocarbons. ground state the state that an electron is in normally as it exists outside of the nucleus of an atom. gravitational lensing the effect of light passing near a high mass and its path being curved. gut epoch the grand unified theory epoch, from 10-43 to 10-35 seconds after the big bang. gravity has separated from the other three fundamental forces. habitable zone the distance from a star where liquid water can exist. also the distances from the galactic center where there are enough heavier elements and not too much radiation for life to exist. heliocentric the theory that the sun is the center of the solar system and that all of the planets orbit the sun. helium flash the stage in the life of a star, after hydrogen fusion has waned. it is the point when a sun-like star begins helium fusion. this does not occur in large stars.