(credit “tracks”: nathan vaughn) major annual meteor showers shower name date of maximum associated parent object comet’s period (years) quadrantid january 3–4 2003eh (asteroid) — lyrid april 22 comet thatcher 415 table 14.1 link to learning 14.1 • meteors 477 [image: astronomy_openstax_page495_img1.jpeg] shower name date of maximum associated parent object comet’s period (years) eta aquarid may 4–5 comet halley 76 delta aquarid july 29–30 comet machholz — perseid august 11–12 comet swift-tuttle 133 orionid october 20–21 comet halley 76 southern taurid october 31 comet encke 3 leonid november 16–17 comet tempel-tuttle 33 geminid december 13 phaethon (asteroid) 1.4 table 14.1 the meteoric dust is not always evenly distributed along the orbit of the comet, so during some years more meteors are seen when earth intersects the dust stream, and in other years fewer.
for example, a very clumpy distribution is associated with the leonid meteors, which in 1833 and again in 1866 (after an interval of 33 years—the period of the comet) yielded the most spectacular showers (sometimes called meteor storms) ever recorded (figure 14.4). during the leonid storm on november 17, 1866, up to a hundred meteors were observed per second in some locations. the leonid shower of 2001 was not this intense, but it peaked at nearly a thousand meteors per hour—one every few seconds—observable from any dark viewing site. figure 14.4 leonid meteor storm. a painting depicts the great meteor shower or storm of 1833, shown with a bit of artistic license. the most dependable annual meteor display is the perseid shower, which appears each year for about three nights near august 11. in the absence of bright moonlight, you can see one meteor every few minutes during a typical perseid shower.
astronomers estimate that the total combined mass of the particles in the perseid swarm is nearly a billion tons; the comet that gave rise to the particles in that swarm, called swift-tuttle, must originally have had at least that much mass. however, if its initial mass were comparable to the mass 478 14 • cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page496_img1.jpeg] measured for comet halley, then swift-tuttle would have contained several hundred billion tons, suggesting that only a very small fraction of the original cometary material survives in the meteor stream. the california academy of sciences has a short animated guide (https://openstax.org/l/30howobsmetsho) on “how to observe a meteor shower.” no shower meteor has ever survived its flight through the atmosphere and been recovered for laboratory analysis. however, there are other ways to investigate the nature of these particles and thereby gain additional insight into the comets from which they are derived. analysis of the flight paths of meteors shows that most of them are very light or porous, with densities typically less than 1.0 g/cm3.
if you placed a fist-sized lump of meteor material on a table in earth’s gravity, it might well fall apart under its own weight. such light particles break up very easily in the atmosphere, accounting for the failure of even relatively large shower meteors to reach the ground. comet dust is apparently fluffy, rather inconsequential stuff. nasa’s stardust mission used a special substance, called aerogel, to collect these particles. we can also infer this from the tiny comet particles recovered in earth’s atmosphere with high-flying aircraft (see figure 13.19). this fluff, by its very nature, cannot reach earth’s surface intact. however, more substantial fragments from asteroids do make it into our laboratories, as we will see in the next section. showering with the stars observing a meteor shower is one of the easiest and most enjoyable astronomy activities for beginners (figure 14.5). the best thing about it is that you don’t need a telescope or binoculars—in fact, they would positively get in your way. what you do need is a site far from city lights, with an unobstructed view of as much sky as possible.