why was brahe reluctant to provide kepler with all his data at one time? 9. according to kepler’s second law, where in a planet’s orbit would it be moving fastest? where would it be moving slowest? 10. the gas pedal, the brakes, and the steering wheel all have the ability to accelerate a car—how? 11. explain how a rocket can propel itself using newton’s third law. 12. a certain material has a mass of 565 g while occupying of space. what is this material? (hint: use table 3.1.) 13. to calculate the momentum of an object, which properties of an object do you need to know? 14. to calculate the angular momentum of an object, which properties of an object do you need to know? 15. what was the great insight newton had regarding earth’s gravity that allowed him to develop the universal law of gravitation? 16. which of these properties of an object best quantifies its inertia: velocity, acceleration, volume, mass, or temperature? 17. pluto’s orbit is more eccentric than any of the major planets. what does that mean? 18.
why is tycho brahe often called “the greatest naked-eye astronomer” of all time? thought questions 19. is it possible to escape the force of gravity by going into orbit around earth? how does the force of gravity in the international space station (orbiting an average of 400 km above earth’s surface) compare with that on the ground? 20. what is the momentum of an object whose velocity is zero? how does newton’s first law of motion include the case of an object at rest? 21. evil space aliens drop you and your fellow astronomy student 1 km apart out in space, very far from any star or planet. discuss the effects of gravity on each of you. 22. a body moves in a perfectly circular path at constant speed. are there forces acting in such a system? how do you know? 23. as friction with our atmosphere causes a satellite to spiral inward, closer to earth, its orbital speed increases. why? 24. use a history book, an encyclopedia, or the internet to find out what else was happening in england during newton’s lifetime and discuss what trends of the time might have contributed to his accomplishments and the rapid acceptance of his work. 25.
two asteroids begin to gravitationally attract one another. if one asteroid has twice the mass of the other, which one experiences the greater force? which one experiences the greater acceleration? 26. how does the mass of an astronaut change when she travels from earth to the moon? how does her weight change? 98 3 • exercises access for free at openstax.org 27. if there is gravity where the international space station (iss) is located above earth, why doesn’t the space station get pulled back down to earth? 28. compare the density, weight, mass, and volume of a pound of gold to a pound of iron on the surface of earth. 29. if identical spacecraft were orbiting mars and earth at identical radii (distances), which spacecraft would be moving faster? why? figuring for yourself 30. by what factor would a person’s weight be increased if earth had 10 times its present mass, but the same volume? 31. suppose astronomers find an earthlike planet that is twice the size of earth (that is, its radius is twice that of earth’s). what must be the mass of this planet such that the gravitational force (fgravity) at the surface would be identical to earth’s?
32. what is the semimajor axis of a circle of diameter 24 cm? what is its eccentricity? 33. if 24 g of material fills a cube 2 cm on a side, what is the density of the material? 34. if 128 g of material is in the shape of a brick 2 cm wide, 4 cm high, and 8 cm long, what is the density of the material? 35. if the major axis of an ellipse is 16 cm, what is the semimajor axis? if the eccentricity is , would this ellipse be best described as mostly circular or very elongated? 36. what is the average distance from the sun (in astronomical units) of an asteroid with an orbital period of 8 years? 37. what is the average distance from the sun (in astronomical units) of a planet with an orbital period of 45.66 years? 38. in 1996, astronomers discovered an icy object beyond pluto that was given the designation 1996 tl 66. it has a semimajor axis of 84 au. what is its orbital period according to kepler’s third law?