link to learning 8.2 • earth’s crust 263 figure 8.9 rift zone and subduction zone. rift and subduction zones are the regions (mostly beneath the oceans) where new crust is formed and old crust is destroyed as part of the cycle of plate tectonics. from a knowledge of how the seafloor is spreading, we can calculate the average age of the oceanic crust. about 60,000 kilometers of active rifts have been identified, with average separation rates of about 5 centimeters per year. the new area added to earth each year is about 2 square kilometers, enough to renew the entire oceanic crust in a little more than 100 million years. this is a very short interval in geological time—less than 3% of the age of earth. the present ocean basins thus turn out to be among the youngest features on our planet. as new crust is added to earth, the old crust must go somewhere. when two plates come together, one plate is often forced beneath another in what is called a subduction zone (figure 8.9). in general, the thick continental masses cannot be subducted, but the thinner oceanic plates can be rather readily thrust down into the upper mantle.
often a subduction zone is marked by an ocean trench; a fine example of this type of feature is the deep japan trench along the coast of asia. the subducted plate is forced down into regions of high pressure and temperature, eventually melting several hundred kilometers below the surface. its material is recycled into a downward-flowing convection current, ultimately balancing the flow of material that rises along rift zones. the amount of crust destroyed at subduction zones is approximately equal to the amount formed at rift zones. all along the subduction zone, earthquakes and volcanoes mark the death throes of the plate. some of the most destructive earthquakes in history have taken place along subduction zones, including the 1923 yokohama earthquake and fire that killed 100,000 people, the 2004 sumatra earthquake and tsunami that killed more than 200,000 people, and the 2011 tohoku earthquake that resulted in the meltdown of three nuclear power reactors in japan. fault zones and mountain building along much of their length, the crustal plates slide parallel to each other. these plate boundaries are marked by cracks or faults.
along active fault zones, the motion of one plate with respect to the other is several centimeters per year, about the same as the spreading rates along rifts. 264 8 • earth as a planet access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page282_img1.jpeg] one of the most famous faults is the san andreas fault in california, which lies at the boundary between the pacific plate and the north american plate (figure 8.10). this fault runs from the gulf of california to the pacific ocean northwest of san francisco. the pacific plate, to the west, is moving northward, carrying los angeles, san diego, and parts of the southern california coast with it. in several million years, los angeles may be an island off the coast of san francisco. figure 8.10 san andreas fault. we see part of a very active region in california where one crustal plate is sliding sideways with respect to the other. the fault is marked by the valley running up the right side of the photo. major slippages along this fault can produce extremely destructive earthquakes.
(credit: john wiley) unfortunately for us, the motion along fault zones does not take place smoothly. the creeping motion of the plates against each other builds up stresses in the crust that are released in sudden, violent slippages that generate earthquakes. because the average motion of the plates is constant, the longer the interval between earthquakes, the greater the stress and the more energy released when the surface finally moves. for example, the part of the san andreas fault near the central california town of parkfield has slipped every 25 years or so during the past century, moving an average of about 1 meter each time. in contrast, the average interval between major earthquakes in the los angeles region is about 150 years, and the average motion is about 7 meters. the last time the san andreas fault slipped in this area was in 1857; tension has been building ever since, and sometime soon it is bound to be released. sensitive instruments placed within the los angeles basin show that the basin is distorting and contracting in size as these tremendous pressures build up beneath the surface. e x a m p l e 8 .