crust a thin layer that sits on top of the mantle and is hard solid materials. dark energy an unknown energy that is responsible for the expansion of the universe. dark energy dominated as the universe continued to expand, dark energy began to dominate over matter (gravity) and the expansion of the universe is accelerating. dark energy era from the present to the future. this is the point where the effects of dark energy are dominating over matter. dark matter matter in the outer regions of the galaxy that we cannot see and do not know what it is. it is detectable by its affect through gravity. dark matter halo a halo of dark matter outside of the galactic halo. dark nebulae (singular is nebula) regions of space where the dust and gas clouds are so dense that they block light from passing through. declination imaginary lines in the sky that form bands around the sky that is parallel to the celestial equator. they go from 0 degrees at the celestial equator to 90 degrees at the celestial poles. deimos one of mars’ moons, probably a captured asteroid. detached binary a binary star system where both stars are still within their roche lobes and are not sharing material with each other.
deuterium bottleneck the delay in creating helium due to the time required to make deuterium in the early universe. differential rotations the rotation of the atmosphere on a gaseous object (jovian planet or the sun) that varies depending on latitude. also known as zonal flow. differentiation the separation of materials inside an object. the heaviest materials drop to the core. diffraction the tendency of a light ray to spread out making it more difficult to get focus. diffraction grating an alternative to a prism that is used in some astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 400 spectroscopes. doppler effect you can tell how fast an object is approaching you based on the shift of lines in the light it emits as it is moving. drake equation a mathematical equation designed to determine the number of planets that have intelligent species that are trying to communicate with others in a galaxy. there are a number of factors (almost all guesses) that are used to determine the number. dust lanes regions of thick dust and gas that block the light from emission nebulae. dwarf planets solar system bodies that orbit the sun, are roughly spherical, but are not massive enough to clear their orbits of debris.
current dwarf planets are: pluto, ceres, eris, haumea, and makemake. eccentricity how elongated an ellipse is. eclipsing binaries binary stars that are not able to be split visually, but can be identified by observing their light curve as one star eclipses the other. ecliptic the path of the earth as it orbits the sun. on earth, the path the sun seems to follow through the background stars. electromagnetic force the fundamental force governing electricity and magnetism. photons are the transfer particle for the electromagnetic force. electromagnetic radiation particles or waves of energy than transfer electrical and magnetic forces. electron degeneracy pressure the pressure required to force hydrogen atoms close enough together for helium fusion to begin. this results in the helium flash. electrons small negatively charged particles that exist outside the nucleus of an atom. ellipse an elongated circle. the path that all objects follow that are orbiting another object. elliptical galaxies large balls of stars with no definite structure. they have from millions to trillions of stars. emission lines the light emitted from a hot non-dense gas in the forms of very specific lines of light that vary depending on what element or molecule is in the cloud of gas.
emission nebula a gas cloud in space that emits light in the red because of excited electrons emitting the balmer series alpha line. emission nebulae (singular is nebula) clouds of dust and gas that glow pink from photons exciting electrons and then re-emitting them in a different direction. enke gap a gap of lower particle density in the outer a ring of saturn. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 401 escape velocity the speed required by an object like a cannon ball that is needed to escape the earth's (or another planet's) gravity. europa jupiter’s second galilean moon. it may have a large liquid ocean under the icy crust. excited state the state of an electron that has received additional energy by a collision with a photon. exoplanets planets that orbit other stars than the sun. extinction dust or gas thick enough to stop light from distant stars reaching earth. extrasolar planets planets that orbit other stars than the sun. extremophiles organisms that can live and evolve in environments that seem too harsh for life to exist. fahrenheit the temperature scale most commonly used in the us. water freezes at 32 degrees and boils at 212 degrees.