(credit: modification of “southern ring nebula (miri image)” by nasa, esa, csa, stsci, webb ero production team; credit: modification of “stephan's quintet (nircam + miri image)” by nasa, esa, csa, stsci, webb ero production team) with the webb, astronomers are able to look into the dusty regions where stars are formed and to probe the atmospheres of planets orbiting other stars, just to name two of its primary aims. its giant mirror is already allowing scientists to look back close to the time when galaxies of stars were first being assembled by the pull of gravity. as always with a pioneering telescope, astronomers are particularly looking forward to learning 6.5 • observations outside earth’s atmosphere 211 [image: astronomy_openstax_page229_img1.jpeg] things that they cannot yet predict. watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/30jwstvid) to learn more about the james webb space telescope, its innovative design, and how it is helping astronomers explore the infrared.
visit nasa's james webb space telescope site (https://openstax.org/l/30jwsttrack) to keep track of how the jwst is doing. high-energy observatories ultraviolet, x-ray, and direct gamma-ray (high-energy electromagnetic wave) observations can be made only from space. such observations first became possible in 1946, with v2 rockets captured from germany after world war ii. the us naval research laboratory put instruments on these rockets for a series of pioneering flights, used initially to detect ultraviolet radiation from the sun. since then, many other rockets have been launched to make x-ray and ultraviolet observations of the sun, and later of other celestial objects. beginning in the 1960s, a steady stream of high-energy observatories has been launched into orbit to reveal and explore the universe at short wavelengths. among recent x-ray telescopes is the chandra x-ray observatory, which was launched in 1999 (figure 6.26). it is producing x-ray images with unprecedented resolution and sensitivity. designing instruments that can collect and focus energetic radiation like x-rays and gamma rays is an enormous technological challenge.
the 2002 nobel prize in physics was awarded to riccardo giacconi, a pioneer in the field of building and launching sophisticated x-ray instruments. in 2008, nasa launched the fermi gamma-ray space telescope, designed to measure cosmic gamma rays at energies greater than any previous telescope, and thus able to collect radiation from some of the most energetic events in the universe. figure 6.26 chandra x-ray satellite. chandra, the world’s most powerful x-ray telescope, was developed by nasa and launched in july 1999. (credit: modification of work by nasa) one major challenge is to design “mirrors” to reflect such penetrating radiation as x-rays and gamma rays, which normally pass straight through matter. however, although the technical details of design are more complicated, the three basic components of an observing system, as we explained earlier in this chapter, are the same at all wavelengths: a telescope to gather up the radiation, filters or instruments to sort the radiation according to wavelength, and some method of detecting and making a permanent record of the observations. table 6.4 lists some of the most important active space observatories that humanity has launched.
link to learning 212 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page230_img1.jpeg] gamma-ray detections can also be made from earth’s surface by using the atmosphere as the primary detector. when a gamma ray hits our atmosphere, it accelerates charged particles (mostly electrons) in the atmosphere. those energetic particles hit other particles in the atmosphere and give off their own radiation. the effect is a cascade of light and energy that can be detected on the ground. the veritas array in arizona and the h.e.s.s. array in namibia are two such ground-based gamma-ray observatories.