and how do we go about looking for something that is many light years away, only about a few dozen kilometers across (if a stellar black hole), and completely black? it turns out that the trick is not to look for the black hole itself but instead to look for what it does to a nearby companion star. as we saw, when very massive stars collapse, they leave behind their gravitational influence. what if a member link to learning describe what to look for when seeking and confirming the presence of a stellar black hole explain how a black hole is inherently black yet can be associated with luminous matter differentiate between stellar black holes and the black holes in the centers of galaxies 846 24 • black holes and curved spacetime access for free at openstax.org of a double-star system becomes a black hole, and its companion manages to survive the death of the massive star? while the black hole disappears from our view, we may be able to deduce its presence from the things it does to its companion. requirements for a black hole so, here is a prescription for finding a black hole: start by looking for a star whose motion (determined from the doppler shift of its spectral lines) shows it to be a member of a binary star system.
if both stars are visible, neither can be a black hole, so focus your attention on just those systems where only one star of the pair is visible, even with our most sensitive telescopes. being invisible is not enough, however, because a relatively faint star might be hard to see next to the glare of a brilliant companion or if it is shrouded by dust. and even if the star really is invisible, it could be a neutron star. therefore, we must also have evidence that the unseen star has a mass too high to be a neutron star and that it is a collapsed object—an extremely small stellar remnant. we can use kepler’s law (see orbits and gravity) and our knowledge of the visible star to measure the mass of the invisible member of the pair. if the mass is greater than about 3 msun, then we are likely seeing (or, more precisely, not seeing) a black hole—as long as we can make sure the object really is a collapsed star. if matter falls toward a compact object of high gravity, the material is accelerated to high speed. near the event horizon of a black hole, matter is moving at velocities that approach the speed of light.
as the atoms whirl chaotically toward the event horizon, they rub against each other; internal friction can heat them to temperatures of 100 million k or more. such hot matter emits radiation in the form of flickering x-rays. the last part of our prescription, then, is to look for a source of x-rays associated with the binary system. since x-rays do not penetrate earth’s atmosphere, such sources must be found using x-ray telescopes in space. in our example, the infalling gas that produces the x-ray emission comes from the black hole’s companion star. as we saw in the death of stars, stars in close binary systems can exchange mass, especially as one of the members expands into a red giant. suppose that one star in a double-star system has evolved to a black hole and that the second star begins to expand. if the two stars are not too far apart, the outer layers of the expanding star may reach the point where the black hole exerts more gravitational force on them than do the inner layers of the red giant to which the atmosphere belongs. the outer atmosphere then passes through the point of no return between the stars and falls toward the black hole.
the mutual revolution of the giant star and the black hole causes the material falling toward the black hole to spiral around it rather than flow directly into it. the infalling gas whirls around the black hole in a pancake of matter called an accretion disk. it is within the inner part of this disk that matter is revolving about the black hole so fast that internal friction heats it up to x-ray–emitting temperatures (see figure 24.1). another way to form an accretion disk in a binary star system is to have a powerful stellar wind come from the black hole’s companion. such winds are a characteristic of several stages in a star’s life. some of the ejected gas in the wind will then flow close enough to the black hole to be captured by it into the disk (figure 24.16). 24.6 • evidence for black holes 847 figure 24.16 binary black hole. this artist’s rendition shows a black hole and star (red). as matter streams from the star, it forms a disk around the black hole. some of the swirling material close to the black hole is pushed outward perpendicular to the disk in two narrow jets. (credit: modification of work by eso/l.