figure 79: visible light spectrum [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page70_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 71 figure 80: electromagnetic spectrum infrared. infrared light is redder than red light, and is not visible to our eyes. when you go outside on a sunny day and you feel all warm and snugly, that warmth is infrared radiation coming from the sun. ultraviolet. ultraviolet light is more violet than violet light. this too is not visible to our eyes. this is the type of radiation they use when you go to a tanning salon. it is responsible for sunburns, skin cancer, and cataracts. x-rays. even higher energy and higher frequency are the x-rays. we use this to see bones and teeth without the interference from muscles and skin. gamma rays. and at the top of the scale are the gamma rays. these are very high energy with very high frequency. there are no typical day-to-day uses for this type of radiation.
electromagnetic spectrum electromagnetic radiation types: radio, infrared light, visible light, ultraviolet light, x-ray, and gamma ray [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page71_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 72 component 20 – tools for mere mortals most celestial objects are too far away for us to travel to them to study them. humans have only been to the moon. even our spacecraft are just now at the edge of the solar system, still light-years from the nearest stars. the only information we are able to get about those objects is brought to us on electromagnetic radiation. our eyes have pupils that dilate in the dark to about 5 mm in diameter. all of the light that we see from distant celestial objects must come in through those two tiny openings. to enable us to gather more information, we must gather more light. we build large telescopes, some with diameters of 30 meters, which collect light coming from those distant objects and focus it down to the 5 mm for our eyes’ pupils, or to send it to a camera. refracting telescopes - refractors galileo was familiar with optics, and that meant he could make lenses.
the original telescopes used lenses to focus the light. these are refracting telescopes. they refract the light through the glass of the lenses. galileo assembled his first telescope in 1609. galileo’s telescope had different optics than what is in modern refracting telescopes. the light coming from a distant source arrives as parallel rays of light. the objective lens (on the left) bends the light. on the right end of the telescope, before the light reaches the focal point, a concave-concave eyepiece straightens the light before it goes to the eye of the observer. this resulted in rather low magnification and a small field of view. figure 81: galileo's telescope [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page72_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 73 focal plane refracting telescopes have different optics than what was inside galileo’s telescope. the light coming from a distant source arrives as parallel rays of light. the objective lens (on the left) bends the light. on the right end of the telescope, after the light reaches the focal point, a convex-convex eyepiece straightens the light before it goes to the eye of the observer.
by using different eyepieces, those with different focal lengths, it is possible to get different magnifications. johannes kepler designed this type of telescope in 1611. chromatic aberration. there is a problem with this simple design for a refracting telescope. it is called chromatic aberration. this is the result of the fact that different wavelengths of light focus at different distances from a lens. this means the red, blue, and green light will all focus at different focal planes (see figure 83). figure 82: kepler's telescope (refractor) figure 83: chromatic aberration and an apochromatic lens lens drawing by egmason [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page73_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page73_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 74 telescopes with additional lenses to eliminate this are called apochromatic refractors. reflecting telescopes - reflectors newtonian telescope. in 1668, isaac newton constructed the first known reflecting telescope. newton realized that light could be focused using a parabolic mirror.