notice in figure 9.16 that several of the large mare craters seem to be surrounded by white material and that the light streaks or rays that can stretch for hundreds of kilometers across the surface are clearly visible. these lighter features are ejecta, splashed out from the crater-forming impact. figure 9.16 appearance of the moon at different phases. (a) illumination from the side brings craters and other topographic features into sharp relief, as seen on the far left side. (b) at full phase, there are no shadows, and it is more difficult to see such features. however, the flat lighting at full phase brings out some surface features, such as the bright rays of ejecta that stretch out from a few large young craters. (credit: modification of work by luc viatour) by the way, there is no danger in looking at the moon with binoculars or telescopes. the reflected sunlight is never bright enough to harm your eyes. in fact, the sunlit surface of the moon has about the same brightness as a sunlit landscape of dark rock on earth.
although the moon looks bright in the night sky, its surface is, on average, much less reflective than earth’s, with its atmosphere and white clouds. this difference is nicely illustrated by the photo of the moon passing in front of earth taken from the deep space climate observatory spacecraft (figure 9.17). since the spacecraft took the image from a position inside the orbit of earth, we see both objects fully illuminated (full moon and full earth). by the way, you cannot see much detail on the moon because the exposure has been set to give a bright image of earth, not the moon. 9.3 • impact craters 303 [image: astronomy_openstax_page321_img1.jpeg] figure 9.17 the moon crossing the face of earth. in this 2015 image from the deep space climate observatory spacecraft, both objects are fully illuminated, but the moon looks darker because it has a much lower average reflectivity than earth.
(credit: modification of work by nasa, dscovr epic team) one interesting thing about the moon that you can see without binoculars or telescopes is popularly called “the new moon in the old moon’s arms.” look at the moon when it is a thin crescent, and you can often make out the faint circle of the entire lunar disk, even though the sunlight shines on only the crescent. the rest of the disk is illuminated not by sunlight but by earthlight—sunlight reflected from earth. the light of the full earth on the moon is about 50 times brighter than that of the full moon shining on earth. using crater counts if a world has had little erosion or internal activity, like the moon during the past 3 billion years, it is possible to use the number of impact craters on its surface to estimate the age of that surface. by “age” here we mean the time since a major disturbance occurred on that surface (such as the volcanic eruptions that produced the lunar maria). we cannot directly measure the rate at which craters are being formed on earth and the moon, since the average interval between large crater-forming impacts is longer than the entire span of human history.
our best-known example of such a large crater, meteor crater in arizona (figure 9.18), is about 50,000 years old. however, the cratering rate can be estimated from the number of craters on the lunar maria or calculated from the number of potential “projectiles” (asteroids and comets) present in the solar system today. both lines of reasoning lead to about the same estimations. figure 9.18 meteor crater. this aerial photo of meteor crater in arizona shows the simple form of a meteorite impact crater. the 304 9 • cratered worlds access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page322_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page322_img2.jpeg] crater’s rim diameter is about 1.2 kilometers. (credit: shane torgerson) for the moon, these calculations indicate that a crater 1 kilometer in diameter should be produced about every 200,000 years, a 10-kilometer crater every few million years, and one or two 100-kilometer craters every billion years.