observations also show that the emission from the accretion disks around the most massive black holes peaks early and then fades. the most powerful quasars are seen only at early times. in order to explain this result, we make use of our model of the energy source of the quasars—namely that quasars are black holes with enough fuel to make a brilliant accretion disk right around them. the fact that there were more quasars long ago (far away) than there are today (nearby) could be explained if there was more material available to be accreted by black holes early in the history of the universe. you might say that the quasars were more active when their black holes had fuel for their “energy-producing engines.” if that fuel was mostly consumed in the first few billion years after the universe began its expansion, then later in its life, a “hungry” black hole would have very little left with which to light up the galaxy’s central regions.
in other words, if matter in the accretion disk is continually being depleted by falling into the black hole or being blown out from the galaxy in the form of jets, then a quasar can continue to radiate only as long as new gas is available to replenish the accretion disk. in fact, there was more gas around to be accreted early in the history of the universe. back then, most gas had not yet collapsed to form stars, so there was more fuel available for both the feeding of black holes and the forming of new stars. much of that fuel was subsequently consumed in the formation of stars during the first few billion years after the universe began its expansion. later in its life, a galaxy would have little left to feed a hungry black hole or to form more new stars. as we see from figure 27.14, both star formation and black hole growth peaked together when the universe was about 2 billion years old. ever since, both have been in sharp decline. we are late to the party of the galaxies and have missed some of the early excitement. observations of nearer galaxies (seen later in time) indicate that there is another source of fuel for the central black holes—the collision of galaxies.
if two galaxies of similar mass collide and merge, or if a smaller galaxy is pulled into a larger one, then gas and dust from one may come close enough to the black hole in the other to be devoured by it and so provide the necessary fuel. astronomers have found that collisions were also much more common early in the history of the universe than they are today. there were more small galaxies in those early times because over time, as we shall see (in the evolution and distribution of galaxies), small galaxies tend to combine into larger ones. again, this means that we would expect to see more quasars long ago (far away) than we do today (nearby)—as we in fact do. codependence of black holes and galaxies once black hole masses began to be measured reliably in the late 1990s, they posed an enigma. it looked as though the mass of the central black hole depended on the mass of the galaxy. the black holes in galaxies always seem to be just 1/200 the mass of the galaxy they live in.
this result is shown schematically in figure 944 27 • active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page962_img1.jpeg] 27.15, and some of the observations are plotted in figure 27.16. figure 27.15 relationship between black hole mass and the mass of the host galaxy. observations show that there is a close correlation between the mass of the black hole at the center of a galaxy and the mass of the spherical distribution of stars that surrounds the black hole. that spherical distribution may be in the form of either an elliptical galaxy or the central bulge of a spiral galaxy. (credit: modification of work by k. cordes, s. brown (stsci)) figure 27.16 correlation between the mass of the central black hole and the mass contained within the bulge of stars surrounding the black hole, using data from real galaxies. the black hole always turns out to be about 1/200 the mass of the stars surrounding it. the horizontal and vertical bars surrounding each point show the uncertainty of the measurement. (credit: modification of work by nicholas j.