890 25 • the milky way galaxy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page908_img1.jpeg] key terms central bulge (or nuclear bulge) the central (round) part of the milky way or a similar galaxy dark matter nonluminous mass, whose presence can be inferred only because of its gravitational influence on luminous matter; the composition of the dark matter is not known dark matter halo the mass in the milky way that extends well beyond the boundary of the luminous stars to a distance of at least 200,000 light-years from the center of the galaxy; although we deduce its existence from its gravity, the composition of this matter remains a mystery differential galactic rotation the idea that different parts of the galaxy turn at different rates, since the parts of the galaxy follow kepler’s third law: more distant objects take longer to complete one full orbit around the center of the galaxy halo the outermost extent of our galaxy (or another galaxy), containing a sparse distribution of stars and globular clusters in a more or less spherical distribution milky way galaxy the band of light encircling the sky, which is due to the many stars and diffuse nebulae lying near the plane of the milky way galaxy population i star a star containing heavy elements; typically young and found in the disk population ii star a star with very low abundance of heavy elements; found throughout the galaxy spiral arm a spiral-shaped region, characterized by relatively dense interstellar material and young stars, that is observed in the disks of spiral galaxies supermassive black hole the object in the center of most large galaxies that is so massive and compact that light cannot escape from it; the milky way’s supermassive black hole contains 4.6 millions of suns’ worth of mass summary 25.1 the architecture of the galaxy the milky way galaxy consists of a thin disk containing dust, gas, and young and old stars; a spherical halo containing populations of very old stars, including rr lyrae variable stars and globular star clusters; a thick, more diffuse disk with stars that have properties intermediate between those in the thin disk and the halo; a peanut-shaped nuclear bulge of mostly old stars around the center; and a supermassive black hole at the very center.
the sun is located roughly halfway out of the milky way, about 26,000 light-years from the center. 25.2 spiral structure the gaseous distribution in the galaxy’s disk has two main spiral arms that emerge from the ends of the central bar, along with several fainter arms and short spurs; the sun is located in one of those spurs. measurements show that the galaxy does not rotate as a solid body, but instead its stars and gas follow differential rotation, such that the material closer to the galactic center completes its orbit more quickly. observations show that galaxies like the milky way take several billion years after they began to form to develop spiral structure. 25.3 the mass of the galaxy the sun revolves completely around the galactic center in about 225 million years (a galactic year). the mass of the galaxy can be determined by measuring the orbital velocities of stars and interstellar matter. the total mass of the galaxy is about msun. as much as 95% of this mass consists of dark matter that emits no electromagnetic radiation and can be detected only because of the gravitational force it exerts on visible stars and interstellar matter.
this dark matter is located mostly in the galaxy’s halo; its nature is not well understood at present. 25.4 the center of the galaxy a supermassive black hole is located at the center of the galaxy. measurements of the velocities of stars 25 • key terms 891 located within a few light-days of the center show that the mass inside their orbits around the center is about 4.6 million msun. radio observations show that this mass is concentrated in a volume with a diameter similar to that of mercury’s orbit. the density of this matter concentration exceeds that of the densest known star clusters by a factor of nearly a million. the only known object with such a high density and total mass is a black hole. 25.5 stellar populations in the galaxy we can roughly divide the stars in the galaxy into two categories. old stars with few heavy elements are referred to as population ii stars and are found in the halo and in globular clusters. population i stars contain more heavy elements than globular cluster and halo stars, are typically younger and found in the disk, and are especially concentrated in the spiral arms. the sun is a member of population i.