(this assumes the sun will lose between 46–50% of its mass during the giant stages, based upon various theoretical models). since a stable white dwarf can no longer contract or produce energy through fusion, its only energy source is the heat represented by the motions of the atomic nuclei in its interior. the light it emits comes from this internal stored heat, which is substantial. gradually, however, the white dwarf radiates away all its heat into space. after many billions of years, the nuclei will be moving much more slowly, and the white dwarf will no longer shine (figure 23.5). it will then be a black dwarf—a cold stellar corpse with the mass of a star and the size of a planet. it will be composed mostly of carbon, oxygen, and neon, the products of the most advanced fusion reactions of which the star was capable. figure 23.5 visible light and x-ray images of the sirius star system. (a) this image taken by the hubble space telescope shows sirius a (the large bright star), and its companion star, the white dwarf known as sirius b (the tiny, faint star at the lower left).
sirius a and b are 8.6 light-years from earth and are our fifth-closest star system. note that the image has intentionally been overexposed to allow us to see sirius b. (b) the same system is shown in x-ray taken with the chandra space telescope. note that sirius a is fainter in x-rays than the hot white dwarf that is sirius b. (credit a: modification of work by nasa, esa, h. bond, m. barstow(university of leicester); credit b: modification of work by nasa/sao/cxc) we have one final surprise as we leave our low-mass star in the stellar graveyard. calculations show that as a degenerate star cools, the atoms inside it in essence “solidify” into a giant, highly compact lattice (organized 782 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page800_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page800_img2.jpeg] rows of atoms, just like in a crystal). when carbon is compressed and crystallized in this way, it becomes a giant diamond-like star.
a white dwarf star might make the most impressive engagement present you could ever see, although any attempt to mine the diamond-like material inside would crush an ardent lover instantly! learn about a recent “diamond star” find, a cold, white dwarf star (https://openstax.org/l/30diamondstar) detected in 2014, which is considered the coldest and dimmest found to date, at the website of the national radio astronomy observatory. evidence that stars can shed a lot of mass as they evolve whether or not a star will become a white dwarf depends on how much mass is lost in the red-giant and earlier phases of evolution. all stars that have masses below the chandrasekhar limit when they run out of fuel will become white dwarfs, no matter what mass they were born with. but which stars shed enough mass to reach this limit? one strategy for answering this question is to look in young, open clusters (which were discussed in star clusters). the basic idea is to search for young clusters that contain one or more white dwarf stars. remember that more massive stars go through all stages of their evolution more rapidly than less massive ones.
suppose we find a cluster that has a white dwarf member and also contains stars on the main sequence that have 6 times the mass of the sun. this means that only those stars with masses greater than 6 msun have had time to exhaust their supply of nuclear energy and complete their evolution to the white dwarf stage. the star that turned into the white dwarf must therefore have had a main-sequence mass of more than 6 msun, since stars with lower masses have not yet had time to use up their stores of nuclear energy. the star that became the white dwarf must, therefore, have gotten rid of at least 4.6 msun so that its mass at the time nuclear energy generation ceased could be less than 1.4 msun. astronomers continue to search for suitable clusters to make this test, and the evidence so far suggests that stars with masses up to about 8 msun can shed enough mass to end their lives as white dwarfs. stars like the sun will probably lose about 45% of their initial mass and become white dwarfs with masses less than 1.4 msun.