note: ppm stands for parts per million. for the latest information on technical data for the earth, go to nasa’s website: http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/earthfact.html astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 134 figure 168: the earth's internal structure drawing by usgs table 10: the layers of the earth's structure layer sub-layer thickness (maximum) comment core inner core 1278 km solid outer core 2200 km liquid mantle lower mantle 2250 km upper mantle 300 km asthenosphere 250 km 90 km the lithosphere is the crust and the uppermost layer of the mantle crust 100 km hydrosphere 20 km this is the liquid water layer hydrosphere component 42 – earth’s structure to understand the structure of planets we have not visited, it helps to understand the planet on which we live; the planet where we can more easily do experiments. the earth has internal structure. understanding how the earth is structured tells us information about the formation of the earth and its early history. the structure the earth is a ball, but it has layers. these layers formed early in earth’s history when the planet was molten.
the heavy materials sank to the center of the earth. this is a process known as differentiation. figure identifies those levels and their thicknesses. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page134_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 135 key layers of the earth’s structure: • hydrosphere • crust • mantle • outer core • inner core seismic waves tell us about the internal structure of the earth figure 169: seismic waves drawing by usgs the core consists of two sublayers, the inner core and outer core. the inner core is solid and is composed of iron and heavy metals. the outer core is also composed of iron and heavy metals but it is liquid. the thickest layer in the earth’s structure is the mantle. it has four sublayers. the mantle consists mostly of silicate rocks that are semi-solid. the upper layer of the mantle is composed of rigid rocks. this layer combined with the crust is known as the lithosphere. the upper layer of the mantle has convection cells. these are places where the material is in motion similar to a pot of boiling water. as the material moves it causes tectonic plate movement of the crust.
moving inward, the next layer of the mantle is composed of weak rock. the rock in this layer is partially molten. the next layer is composed of very strong rock. these two layers are known as the asthenosphere. the lowest layer of the mantle is called the lower mantle. it is composed of very rigid rock. the next layer of the earth’s structure is the crust. this is a rigid and rocky layer. the top layer of the earth’s internal structure is the hydrosphere. this is the layer of liquid water that exists on the earth’s surface. this is primarily the earth’s oceans. the crust is thinnest under the oceans. seismic waves seismic waves, from natural sources such as earthquakes, or from man-made sources such as explosions, travel through the earth’s interior. the behavior of these waves tells us the location of the boundaries between layers. as the material changes in composition or in state (solid or liquid) the waves reflect [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page135_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 136 differently. figure shows how these waves react to the layers within the earth.
there are two kinds of waves shown in the drawing: primary: “p” and secondary: “s”. there are also surface waves that travel along the crust. waves that travel through the core are designated with a “k”. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 137 key layers of the earth’s atmosphere: • exosphere • thermosphere • mesosphere • stratosphere • troposphere the ozone layer is in the stratosphere and protects us from ultraviolet light. component 43 – earth’s atmosphere structure and temperature the earth’s atmosphere has 5 levels: • troposphere – this is the level closest to the earth’s surface. almost all weather occurs in this level. this is also the level in which most aircraft fly. it extends from the earth’s surface to 12 km. as the altitude increases the temperature drops steadily. • stratosphere – this is the next level above the troposphere. this is where the ozone layer is. it extends from 12 to 50 km. as the altitude increases, the temperature also increases. • mesosphere – this is the level of the atmosphere where the atoms are dense enough to cause friction with incoming meteors. it extends from 50 to 85 km.