but the moon’s orbital plane is inclined about 5 degrees from the earth’s orbital plane. eclipses occur where the two orbital planes intersect (see figure 36), figure 34: eclipse paths figure 35: moon's orbital axis tilt [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page43_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page43_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 44 figure 36: perfect alignments and only when the moon is in a place in its orbit that is crossing that intersection. these two events are called lunar nodes. the ascending node is where the moon is moving from south of the ecliptic to north of the ecliptic. the descending node is where the moon is moving from north of the ecliptic to south of the ecliptic. note: this means that you will see lunar eclipses at the most twice each year, when the line of nodes points to the sun. this is also true for solar eclipses. there will be at most two per year.
lunar or solar eclipses occur a maximum of twice each year [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page44_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 45 *** section ii. astronomy – history photo by citypeek photo by kristian h resset a more thorough discussion of astronomical history is available in appendix 6 – the history of astronomy. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page45_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page45_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 46 component 12 – the science of early people why the stars? it all began so long ago that there are no records. early people, with no modern technology, but they were beginning to learn new skills; farming and sailing. if you lived somewhere like the nile river valley, you would be washed out by floods each year. there was a flooding season, but you had no calendars, so you had no way to know when it was going to happen. if you planted your crops before the flood, the seeds would be washed away. if you wait too long, you may not have enough time for your seeds to grow and produce food.
there were locusts too. you needed to know when they were likely to arrive so you can harvest your crops before they arrive. too early, and you will get less to eat. too late, and the locusts will eat your harvest. knowledge of the stars was useful in agriculture. if you stay near shore when sailing, then you are probably ok, but if you venture far from shore you need to know where you are. without it, you may run out of food and water before you reach land or the winds may carry you far off course and you could land in an unfriendly land. knowledge of the stars was useful in navigation. the solution is in the stars. early people, sitting around the campfire would notice rhythms in the movement of the stars. a few things move separately (the moon, the planets), but most of the stars behaved and moved like clockwork. they could be used as a calendar or a map. early records of tracking movements in the sky the earliest records date back to around 1800 bce and are from the babylonians (in current day iraq). initially, the observations focused on the sun, moon, and venus; but later included mercury, jupiter, and saturn as well.
they were able to use this data to create predictions of their motions. the primary purpose of this study appears to have been for religious reasons. it is believed that early people used these early tools to more closely connect themselves to the greater universe. early structures for reading the sky early people found ways to build structures that they could use to predict the seasons. they worked with the tools they had and the materials on-hand and build astronomical tools. the study of these early structures is called archeoastronomy. there are lists of these sites from all over the world. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 47 stone circles. initially, they would mark points in a circle that would enable them to watch for events in the sky. when these events happened they would know the seasons would be about to change. the easiest way for them to do this was to set stones on the ground in a big circle, sometimes with spokes. a good example of one of these is the bighorn medicine wheel located atop medicine mountain near lovell, wyoming. deciphering the layout. early people did not leave any instructions for their tools. astronomers and historians have tried for many years to understand how they would have been used.