a size scale for the system gives the distance in au (remember that one astronomical unit is the distance between earth and the sun.) (credit: modification of work by ben zuckerman) direct imaging is an important technique for characterizing an exoplanet. the brightness of the planet can be measured at different wavelengths. these observations provide an estimate for the temperature of the planet’s atmosphere; in the case of hr 8799 planet 1, the color suggests the presence of thick clouds. spectra can also be obtained from the faint light to analyze the atmospheric constituents. a spectrum of hr 8799 21.4 • planets beyond the solar system: search and discovery 723 [image: astronomy_openstax_page741_img1.jpeg] planet 1 indicates a hydrogen-rich atmosphere, while the closer planet 4 shows evidence for methane in the atmosphere. another way to overcome the blurring effect of earth’s atmosphere is to observe from space. infrared may be the optimal wavelength range in which to observe because planets get brighter in the infrared while stars like our sun get fainter, thereby making it easier to detect a planet against the glare of its star. special optical techniques can be used to suppress the light from the central star and make it easier to see the planet itself.
however, even if we go into space, it will be difficult to obtain images of earth-size planets. 21.5 exoplanets everywhere: what we are learning learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: before the discovery of exoplanets, most astronomers expected that other planetary systems would be much like our own—planets following roughly circular orbits, with the most massive planets several au from their parent star. such systems do exist in large numbers, but many exoplanets and planetary systems are very different from those in our solar system. another surprise is the existence of whole classes of exoplanets that we simply don’t have in our solar system: planets with masses between the mass of earth and neptune, and planets that are several times more massive than jupiter. kepler results the kepler telescope has been responsible for the discovery of most exoplanets, especially at smaller sizes, as illustrated in figure 21.22, where the kepler discoveries are plotted in yellow. you can see the wide range of sizes, including planets substantially larger than jupiter and smaller than earth.
the absence of kepler- discovered exoplanets with orbital periods longer than a few hundred days is a consequence of the 4-year lifetime of the mission. (remember that three evenly spaced transits must be observed to register a discovery.) at the smaller sizes, the absence of planets much smaller than one earth radius is due to the difficulty of detecting transits by very small planets. in effect, the “discovery space” for kepler was limited to planets with orbital periods less than 400 days and sizes larger than mars. explain what we have learned from our discovery of exoplanets identify which kind of exoplanets appear to be the most common in the galaxy discuss the kinds of planetary systems we are finding around other stars 724 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org figure 21.22 exoplanet discoveries through 2017. the vertical axis shows the radius of each planet compared to earth. horizontal lines show the size of earth, neptune, and jupiter. the horizontal axis shows the time each planet takes to make one orbit (and is given in earth days).
recall that mercury takes 88 days and earth takes a little more than 365 days to orbit the sun. the yellow dots show planets discovered by the kepler mission using transits, and the blue dots are the discoveries by other projects and techniques. when this graph was made, astronomers had discovered just over 3,500 exoplanets; as of the start of 2022, that number has risen to roughly 5,000. (credit: modification of work by nasa/ames research center/jessie dotson and wendy stenzel) one of the primary objectives of the kepler mission was to find out how many stars hosted planets and especially to estimate the frequency of earthlike planets. although kepler looked at only a very tiny fraction of the stars in the galaxy, the sample size was large enough to draw some interesting conclusions. while the observations apply only to the stars observed by kepler, those stars are reasonably representative, and so astronomers can extrapolate to the entire galaxy. figure 21.23 shows that the kepler discoveries include many rocky, earth-size planets, far more than jupiter- size gas planets.