we now know from historical records that comet halley has actually been observed and recorded on every passage near the sun since 239 bce at intervals ranging from 74 to 79 years. the period of its return varies somewhat because of orbital changes produced by the pull of the giant planets. in 1910, earth was brushed by the comet’s tail, causing much needless public concern. comet halley last appeared in our skies in 1986 (figure characterize the general physical appearance of comets explain the range of cometary orbits describe the size and composition of a typical comet’s nucleus discuss the atmospheres of comets summarize the discoveries of the rosetta mission 450 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org 13.16), when it was met by several spacecraft that gave us a wealth of information about its makeup; it will return in 2061. figure 13.16 comet halley. this composite of three images (one in red, one in green, one in blue) shows comet halley as seen with a large telescope in chile in 1986. during the time the three images were taken in sequence, the comet moved among the stars.
the telescope was moved to keep the image of the comet steady, causing the stars to appear in triplicate (once in each color) in the background. (credit: modification of work by eso) edmund halley: astronomy’s renaissance man edmund halley (figure 13.17), a brilliant astronomer who made contributions in many fields of science and statistics, was by all accounts a generous, warm, and outgoing person. in this, he was quite the opposite of his good friend isaac newton, whose great work, the principia (see orbits and gravity), halley encouraged, edited, and helped pay to publish. halley himself published his first scientific paper at age 20, while still in college. as a result, he was given a royal commission to go to saint helena (a remote island off the coast of africa where napoleon would later be exiled) to make the first telescopic survey of the southern sky. after returning, he received the equivalent of a master’s degree and was elected to the prestigious royal society in england, all at the age of 22.
in addition to his work on comets, halley was the first astronomer to recognize that the so-called “fixed” stars move relative to each other, by noting that several bright stars had changed their positions since ptolemy’s publication of the ancient greek catalogs. he wrote a paper on the possibility of an infinite universe, proposed that some stars may be variable, and discussed the nature and size of nebulae (glowing cloudlike structures visible in telescopes). while in saint helena, halley observed the planet mercury going across the face of the sun and developed the mathematics of how such transits could be used to establish voyagers in astronomy 13.3 • the “long-haired” comets 451 [image: astronomy_openstax_page469_img1.jpeg] the size of the solar system. in other fields, halley published the first table of human life expectancies (the precursor of life-insurance statistics); wrote papers on monsoons, trade winds, and tides (charting the tides in the english channel for the first time); laid the foundations for the systematic study of earth’s magnetic field; studied evaporation and how inland waters become salty; and even designed an underwater diving bell.
he served as a british diplomat, advising the emperor of austria and squiring the future czar of russia around england (avidly discussing, we are told, both the importance of science and the quality of local brandy). in 1703, halley became a professor of geometry at oxford, and in 1720, he was appointed astronomer royal of england. he continued observing earth and the sky and publishing his ideas for another 20 years, until death claimed him at age 85. figure 13.17 edmund halley (1656–1742). halley was a prolific contributor to the sciences. his study of comets at the turn of the eighteenth century helped predict the orbit of the comet that now bears his name. only a few comets return in a time measureable in human terms (shorter than a century or two), like comet halley does; these are called short-period comets. many short-period comets have had their orbits changed by coming too close to one of the giant planets—most often jupiter (and they are thus sometimes called jupiter- family comets). most comets have long periods and will take thousands of years to return, if they return at all.