see appendix b for more sources of astronomical images. videos powers of ten: www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fkbhvdjuy0 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fkbhvdjuy0). this classic short video is a much earlier version of powers of ten, narrated by philip morrison (9:00). the known universe: www.youtube.com/watch?v=17jymdn0w6u (https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=17jymdn0w6u). this video tour from the american museum of natural history has realistic animation, music, and captions (6:30). wanderers: apod.nasa.gov/apod/ap141208.html (https://apod.nasa.gov/apod/ap141208.html). this video provides a tour of the solar system, with narrative by carl sagan, imagining other worlds with dramatically 30 1 • for further exploration access for free at openstax.org realistic paintings (3:50). 1 • for further exploration 31 32 1 • for further exploration access for free at openstax.org figure 2.1 night sky.
in this panoramic photograph of the night sky from the atacama desert in chile, we can see the central portion of the milky way galaxy arcing upward in the center of the frame. on the left, the large magellanic cloud and the small magellanic cloud (smaller galaxies that orbit the milky way galaxy) are easily visible from the southern hemisphere. (credit: modification of work by eso/y. beletsky) chapter outline 2.1 the sky above 2.2 ancient astronomy 2.3 astrology and astronomy 2.4 the birth of modern astronomy thinking ahead much to your surprise, a member of the flat earth society moves in next door. he believes that earth is flat and all the nasa images of a spherical earth are either faked or simply show the round (but flat) disk of earth from above. how could you prove to your new neighbor that earth really is a sphere? (when you’ve thought about this on your own, you can check later in the chapter for some suggested answers.) today, few people really spend much time looking at the night sky.
in ancient days, before electric lights robbed so many people of the beauty of the sky, the stars and planets were an important aspect of everyone’s daily life. all the records that we have—on paper and in stone—show that ancient civilizations around the world noticed, worshipped, and tried to understand the lights in the sky and fit them into their own view of the world. these ancient observers found both majestic regularity and never-ending surprise in the motions of the heavens. through their careful study of the planets, the greeks and later the romans laid the foundation of the science of astronomy. observing the sky: the birth of astronomy 2 [image: astronomy_openstax_page51_img1.jpeg] 2.1 the sky above learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: our senses suggest to us that earth is the center of the universe—the hub around which the heavens turn. this geocentric (earth-centered) view was what almost everyone believed until the european renaissance. after all, it is simple, logical, and seemingly self-evident. furthermore, the geocentric perspective reinforced those philosophical and religious systems that taught the unique role of human beings as the central focus of the cosmos.
however, the geocentric view happens to be wrong. one of the great themes of our intellectual history is the overthrow of the geocentric perspective. let us, therefore, take a look at the steps by which we reevaluated the place of our world in the cosmic order. the celestial sphere if you go on a camping trip or live far from city lights, your view of the sky on a clear night is pretty much identical to that seen by people all over the world before the invention of the telescope. gazing up, you get the impression that the sky is a great hollow dome with you at the center (figure 2.2), and all the stars are an equal distance from you on the surface of the dome. the top of that dome, the point directly above your head, is called the zenith, and where the dome meets earth is called the horizon. from the sea or a flat prairie, it is easy to see the horizon as a circle around you, but from most places where people live today, the horizon is at least partially hidden by mountains, trees, buildings, or smog. figure 2.2 the sky around us. the horizon is where the sky meets the ground; an observer’s zenith is the point directly overhead.