this immediately tells us that the initial doppler discovery of many hot jupiters was a biased sample, in effect, finding the odd planetary systems because they were the easiest to detect. however, there is one huge difference between this observed size distribution and that of planets in our solar system. the most common planets have radii between 1.4 and 2.8 that of earth, sizes for which we have no examples in the solar system. these have been nicknamed super-earths, while the other large group with sizes between 2.8 and 4 that of earth are often called mini-neptunes. 21.5 • exoplanets everywhere: what we are learning 725 [image: astronomy_openstax_page743_img1.jpeg] figure 21.23 kepler discoveries. this bar graph shows the number of planets of each size range found among the first 2213 kepler planet discoveries. sizes range from half the size of earth to 20 times that of earth. on the vertical axis, you can see the fraction that each size range makes up of the total.
note that planets that are between 1.4 and 4 times the size of earth make up the largest fractions, yet this size range is not represented among the planets in our solar system. (credit: modification of work by nasa/kepler mission) what a remarkable discovery it is that the most common types of planets in the galaxy are completely absent from our solar system and were unknown until kepler’s survey. however, recall that really small planets were difficult for the kepler instruments to find. so, to estimate the frequency of earth-size exoplanets, we need to correct for this sampling bias. the result is the corrected size distribution shown in figure 21.24. notice that in this graph, we have also taken the step of showing not the number of kepler detections but the average number of planets per star for solar-type stars (spectral types f, g, and k). 726 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page744_img1.jpeg] figure 21.24 size distribution of planets for stars similar to the sun. we show the average number of planets per star in each planet size range.
(the average is less than one because some stars will have zero planets of that size range.) this distribution, corrected for biases in the kepler data, shows that earth-size planets may actually be the most common type of exoplanets. (credit: modification of work by nasa/kepler mission) we see that the most common planet sizes of are those with radii from 1 to 3 times that of earth—what we have called “earths” and “super-earths.” each group occurs in about one-third to one-quarter of stars. in other words, if we group these sizes together, we can conclude there is nearly one such planet per star! and remember, this census includes primarily planets with orbital periods less than 2 years. we do not yet know how many undiscovered planets might exist at larger distances from their star. all the new observations of exoplanets allow astronomers to estimate the total number of planets in our galaxy. for solar type stars (spectral types f, g, or k), we find that while many stars have no planets, many others have multiple planets. the amazing conclusion from these observations is that there may be more planets in our galaxy than stars.
surely, this will turn out to be one of the most important results from astronomy in this century. planets with known densities for several hundred exoplanets, we have been able to measure both the size of the planet from transit data and its mass from doppler data, yielding an estimate of its density. comparing the average density of exoplanets to the density of planets in our solar system helps us understand whether they are rocky or gaseous in nature. this has been particularly important for understanding the structure of the new categories of super-earths and mini-neptunes with masses between 3–10 times the mass of earth. a key observation so far is that planets that are more than 10 times the mass of earth have substantial gaseous envelopes (like uranus and neptune) whereas lower-mass planets are predominately rocky in nature (like the terrestrial 21.5 • exoplanets everywhere: what we are learning 727 [image: astronomy_openstax_page745_img1.jpeg] planets). figure 21.25 compares all the exoplanets that have both mass and radius measurements.