estimate the maximum height of the mountains on a hypothetical planet similar to earth but with twice the surface gravity of our planet. 14 • exercises 507 508 14 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 15.1 our star. the sun—our local star—is quite average in many ways. however, that does not stop it from being a fascinating object to study. from solar flares and coronal mass ejections, like the one seen coming from the sun in the top right of this image, the sun is a highly dynamic body at the center of our solar system. this image combines two separate satellite pictures of the sun—the inner one from the solar dynamics observatory and the outer one from the solar and heliospheric observatory. (credit: modification of work by esa/nasa) chapter outline 15.1 the structure and composition of the sun 15.2 the solar cycle 15.3 solar activity above the photosphere 15.4 space weather thinking ahead “space weather” may sound like a contradiction. how can there be weather in the vacuum of space? yet space weather, which refers to changing conditions in space, is an active field of research and can have profound effects on earth.
we are all familiar with the ups and downs of weather on earth, and how powerful storms can be devastating for people and vegetation. although we are separated from the sun by a large distance as well as by the vacuum of space, we now understand that great outbursts on the sun (solar storms, in effect) can cause changes in the atmosphere and magnetic field of earth, sometimes even causing serious problems on the ground. in this chapter, we will explore the nature of the sun’s outer layers, the changing conditions and activity there, and the ways that the sun affects earth. by studying the sun, we also learn much that helps us understand stars in general. the sun is, in astronomical terms, a rather ordinary star—not unusually hot or cold, old or young, large or small. indeed, we are lucky that the sun is typical. just as studies of earth help us understand observations of the more distant planets, so too does the sun serve as a guide to astronomers in interpreting the messages contained in the light we receive from distant stars. as you will learn, the sun is dynamic, continuously undergoing change, balancing the forces of nature to keep itself in equilibrium.
in this chapter, we describe the components of the sun, how it changes with time, and how those changes affect earth. the sun: a garden-variety star 15 [image: astronomy_openstax_page527_img1.jpeg] 15.1 the structure and composition of the sun learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the sun, like all stars, is an enormous ball of extremely hot, largely ionized gas, shining under its own power. and we do mean enormous. the sun could fit 109 earths side-by-side across its diameter, and it has enough volume (takes up enough space) to hold about 1.3 million earths. the sun does not have a solid surface or continents like earth, nor does it have a solid core (figure 15.2). however, it does have a lot of structure and can be discussed as a series of layers, not unlike an onion. in this section, we describe the huge changes that occur in the sun’s extensive interior and atmosphere, and the dynamic and violent eruptions that occur daily in its outer layers. figure 15.2 earth and the sun.
here, earth is shown to scale with part of the sun and a giant loop of hot gas erupting from its surface. the inset shows the entire sun, smaller. (credit: modification of work by soho/eit/esa) some of the basic characteristics of the sun are listed in table 15.1. although some of the terms in that table may be unfamiliar to you right now, you will get to know them as you read further.