when the smaller, hotter star goes behind the larger one, its light is completely blocked, and so there is a strong dip in the light curve. when the smaller star goes in front of the bigger one, a small amount of light from the bigger star is blocked, so there is a smaller dip in the light curve. the discovery of the first eclipsing binary helped solve a long-standing puzzle in astronomy. the star algol, in the constellation of perseus, changes its brightness in an odd but regular way. normally, algol is a fairly bright star, but at intervals of 2 days, 20 hours, 49 minutes, it fades to one-third of its regular brightness. after a few hours, it brightens to normal again. this effect is easily seen, even without a telescope, if you know what to look for. in 1783, a young english astronomer named john goodricke (1764–1786) made a careful study of algol (see the feature on john goodricke for a discussion of his life and work). even though goodricke could neither hear nor speak, he made a number of major discoveries in the 21 years of his brief life.
he suggested that algol’s unusual brightness variations might be due to an invisible companion that regularly passes in front of the brighter star and blocks its light. unfortunately, goodricke had no way to test this idea, since it was not until about a century later that equipment became good enough to measure algol’s spectrum. in 1889, the german astronomer hermann vogel (1841–1907) demonstrated that, like mizar, algol is a spectroscopic binary. the spectral lines of algol were not observed to be double because the fainter star of the pair gives off too-little light compared with the brighter star for its lines to be conspicuous in the composite spectrum. nevertheless, the periodic shifting back and forth of the brighter star’s lines gave evidence that it was revolving about an unseen companion. (the lines of both components need not be visible for a star to be recognized as a spectroscopic binary.) the discovery that algol is a spectroscopic binary verified goodricke’s hypothesis. the plane in which the stars revolve is turned nearly edgewise to our line of sight, and each star passes in front of the other during every revolution.
(the eclipse of the fainter star in the algol system is not very noticeable because the part of it that is covered contributes little to the total light of the system. this second eclipse can, however, be detected by careful measurements.) any binary star produces eclipses if viewed from the proper direction, near the plane of its orbit, so that one star passes in front of the other (see figure 18.10). but from our vantage point on earth, only a small percentage of binary star systems are oriented in this way. 18.3 • diameters of stars 615 [image: astronomy_openstax_page633_img1.jpeg] astronomy and mythology: algol the demon star and perseus the hero the name algol comes from the arabic ras al ghul, meaning “the demon’s head.”3 the word “ghoul” in english has the same derivation. as discussed in observing the sky: the birth of astronomy, many of the bright stars have arabic names because during the long dark ages in medieval europe, it was arabic astronomers who preserved and expanded the greek and roman knowledge of the skies.
the reference to the demon is part of the ancient greek legend of the hero perseus, who is commemorated by the constellation in which we find algol and whose adventures involve many of the characters associated with the northern constellations. perseus was one of the many half-god heroes fathered by zeus (jupiter in the roman version), the king of the gods in greek mythology. zeus had, to put it delicately, a roving eye and was always fathering somebody or other with a human maiden who caught his fancy. (perseus derives from per zeus, meaning “fathered by zeus.”) set adrift with his mother by an (understandably) upset stepfather, perseus grew up on an island in the aegean sea. the king there, taking an interest in perseus’ mother, tried to get rid of the young man by assigning him an extremely difficult task. in a moment of overarching pride, a beautiful young woman named medusa had compared her golden hair to that of the goddess athena (minerva for the romans).