• amplitude (a) – the height of the wave above the equilibrium state • equilibrium state – the line where the amplitude is zero. figure 76: reflection photo by zátonyi sándor figure 77: parts of a wave [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page67_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page67_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 68 figure 78: the photoelectric effect equation 3: photon energy 𝑒= ℎ∗𝑓 h is planck’s constant. h = 6.626176 * 10-34 joule-seconds. light can behave as waves and also at times as particles (photons) in addition to these features, there are additional characteristics that need to be understood. • velocity (c) – light in the vacuum of space has a maximum speed. it is called the speed of light. the speed of light is 299,792 km/sec in a vaccuum or 186,282 mi/sec. in this class we will use 300,000 km/sec or 186,000 mi/sec. the speed of light is shown by the symbol “c” in equations.
• frequency (f) – when a light wave passes you, this is the number of crests that pass you per second. 1 crest per second is one hertz. the frequency is equal to the speed of light divided by the wavelength. • period (p) – the period of a light wave is the time it takes for the wave to pass you measuring from crest to crest. the period equals one divided by the frequency. light as particles (photons) light also behaves like small massless particles called photons. einstein won his nobel prize in physics for his studies of the photoelectric effect which demonstrated the particle nature of light. light of lower frequencies (infrared and red) is too low energy to eject electrons from the metal surface. as the frequency increases, the energy increases. once you have enough energy electrons can be ejected. higher energy photons result in higher velocity electrons. more photons of the same frequency cause more electrons to be emitted.
equation 2: frequency, wavelength and period 𝑓= 𝑐 𝜆 𝜆= 𝑐 𝑓 𝑝= 1 𝑓 [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page68_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 69 electromagnetic radiation does not need a medium in which to travel. it can travel through the vacuum of space. electromagnetic radiation and the vacuum of space sound waves in air and waves in water require atoms and molecules to move from place to place. the line from the movie alien: “in space no one can hear you scream.” is correct. since space is a vacuum, sound waves are not able to travel through space. electromagnetic radiation is different. light waves can travel through a vacuum. if this were not true, then space could not be a vacuum or we would see nothing beyond our atmosphere. the earth would be cold and dark. but we do see stars and we do receive sunlight, and we now know that space is indeed a near vacuum. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 70 visible light is: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and violet different frequencies tell us information about events at many different energy levels.
component 19 – electromagnetic radiation visible light colors. we see light that ranges from red to violet. this is called the visible light spectrum. although this is a gradual transition from red to orange and eventually to violet, we break the colors that we see into groups: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and violet. we remember the list by roygbv. (note there is no “i”. indigo is really a deep blue.) we will discuss the characteristics of light in more detail under later principles, but for now the basics are useful to know. frequency. frequency increases as you move from red to violet. energy. the energy of the photons increases as you move from red to violet. wavelength. wavelength gets shorter as you move from red to violet. the big picture but, the visible light part of the spectrum is only a tiny part of the overall electromagnetic (em) spectrum. there are many larger pieces that we do not see. radio waves. this is very low energy, and low frequency, radiation. we use radio waves in our daily lives for radio transmission, television transmissions, mobile phones, and gps. this is how we communicate with satellites and spacecraft.