this is why such occultation measurements are so useful for astronomers. check your learning how close to saturn would a spacecraft have to be to make out detail in its rings as small as 20 km, if its camera has an angular resolution of 5 arcsec? answer: using our formula, we get so, the distance is about 825,000 km. interactions between rings and moons much of our fascination with planetary rings is a result of their intricate structures, most of which owe their existence to the gravitational effect of moons, without which the rings would be flat and featureless. indeed, it is becoming clear that without moons there would probably be no rings at all because, left to themselves, thin disks of small particles gradually spread and dissipate. most of the gaps in saturn’s rings, and also the location of the outer edge of the a ring, result from gravitational resonances with small inner moons. a resonance takes place when two objects have orbital periods that are exact ratios of each other, such as 1:2 or 2:3. for example, any particle in the gap at the inner side of the cassini division of saturn’s rings would have a period equal to one-half that of saturn’s moon mimas.
such a particle would be nearest mimas in the same part of its orbit every second revolution. the repeated gravitational tugs of mimas, acting always in the same direction, would perturb it, forcing it into a new orbit outside the gap. in this way, the cassini division became depleted of ring material over long periods of time. the cassini mission revealed a great deal of fine structure in saturn’s rings. unlike the earlier voyager flybys, cassini was able to observe the rings for more than a decade, revealing a remarkable range of changes, on time scales from a few minutes to several years. many of the features newly seen in cassini data indicated the presence of condensations or small moons only a few tens of meters across imbedded in the rings. as each small moon moves, it produces waves in the surrounding ring material like the wake left by a moving ship. even when the moon is too small to be resolved, its characteristic waves could be photographed by cassini. one of the most interesting rings of saturn is the narrow f ring, which contains several apparent ringlets within its 90-kilometer width. in places, the f ring breaks up into two or three parallel strands that sometimes show bends or kinks.
most of the rings of uranus and neptune are also narrow ribbons like the f ring of saturn. clearly, the gravity of some objects must be keeping the particles in these thin rings from spreading out. as we have seen, the largest features in the rings of saturn are produced by gravitational resonances with the inner moons, while much of the fine structure is caused by smaller embedded moons. in the case of saturn’s f ring, close-up images revealed that it is bounded by the orbits of two moons, called pandora and prometheus (figure 12.32). these two small moons (each about 100 kilometers in diameter) are referred to as shepherd moons, since their gravitation serves to “shepherd” the ring particles and keep them confined to a narrow ribbon. a similar situation applies to the epsilon ring of uranus, which is shepherded by the moons cordelia 424 12 • rings, moons, and pluto access for free at openstax.org and ophelia. these two shepherds, each about 50 kilometers in diameter, orbit about 2000 kilometers inside and outside the ring. figure 12.32 saturn’s f ring and its shepherd moons.
(a) this cassini image shows the narrow, complex f ring of saturn, with its two small shepherd moons pandora (left) and prometheus (right). (b) in this closer view, the shepherd moon pandora (84 kilometers across) is seen next to the f ring, in which the moon is perturbing the main (brightest) strand of ring particles as it passes. you can see the dark side of pandora on this image because it is being illuminated by the light reflected from saturn. (credit a, b: modification of work by nasa/jpl/space science institute) you can download a movie (https://openstax.org/l/30shprdmns) showing the two shepherd moons on either side of saturn’s f ring. theoretical calculations suggest that the other narrow rings in the uranian and neptunian systems should also be controlled by shepherd moons, but none has been located. the calculated diameter for such shepherds (about 10 kilometers) was just at the limit of detectability for the voyager cameras, so it is impossible to say whether they are present or not.