although all three orbit in roughly the same inner zone around the sun and all apparently started with about the same chemical mix of silicates and metals, their evolutionary paths have diverged. as a result, venus became hot and dry, mars became cold and dry, and only earth ended up with what we consider a hospitable climate. we have discussed the runaway greenhouse effect on venus and the runaway refrigerator effect on mars, but we do not understand exactly what started these two planets down these separate evolutionary paths. was earth ever in danger of a similar fate? or might it still be diverted onto one of these paths, perhaps due to stress on the atmosphere generated by human pollutants? one of the reasons for studying venus and mars is to seek insight into these questions. some people have even suggested that if we understood the evolution of mars and venus better, we could possibly reverse their evolution and restore more earthlike environments. while it seems unlikely that humans could ever make either mars or venus into a replica of earth, considering such possibilities is a useful part of our more general quest to understand the delicate environmental balance that distinguishes our planet from its two neighbors.
in cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system, we return to the comparative study of the terrestrial planets and their divergent evolutionary histories. link to learning compare the planetary evolution of venus, earth, and mars 10.6 • divergent planetary evolution 355 figure 10.32 new vehicles on mars. (a) the ingenuity helicopter flies above the martian surface. (b) the chinese zhurong rover, deployed in june 2021, is next to the tianwen-1 lander; the “group portrait” was taken by a wireless camera placed by the rover.
(credit a: modification of work by nasa/jpl; credit b: modification of work by the china national space administration) 356 10 • earthlike planets: venus and mars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page374_img1.jpeg] key terms runaway greenhouse effect the process by which the greenhouse effect, rather than remaining stable or being lessened through intervention, continues to grow at an increasing rate tectonic geological features that result from stresses and pressures in the crust of a planet; tectonic forces can lead to earthquakes and motion of the crust summary 10.1 the nearest planets: an overview venus, the nearest planet, is a great disappointment through the telescope because of its impenetrable cloud cover. mars is more tantalizing, with dark markings and polar caps. early in the twentieth century, it was widely believed that the “canals” of mars indicated intelligent life there. mars has only 11% the mass of earth, but venus is nearly our twin in size and mass. mars rotates in 24 hours and has seasons like earth; venus has a retrograde rotation period of 243 days. both planets have been extensively explored by spacecraft.
10.2 the geology of venus venus has been mapped by radar, especially with the magellan spacecraft. its crust consists of 75% lowland lava plains, numerous volcanic features, and many large coronae, which are the expression of subsurface volcanism. the planet has been modified by widespread tectonics driven by mantle convection, forming complex patterns of ridges and cracks and building high continental regions such as ishtar. the surface is extraordinarily inhospitable, with pressure of 90 bars and temperature of 730 k, but several russian venera landers investigated it successfully. 10.3 the massive atmosphere of venus the atmosphere of venus is 96% co2. thick clouds at altitudes of 30 to 60 kilometers are made of sulfuric acid, and a co2 greenhouse effect maintains the high surface temperature. venus presumably reached its current state from more earthlike initial conditions as a result of a runaway greenhouse effect, which included the loss of large quantities of water. 10.4 the geology of mars most of what we know about mars is derived from spacecraft: highly successful orbiters, landers, and rovers.