however, io’s orbit is not exactly circular due to gravitational perturbations (tugs) from europa and ganymede. in its slightly eccentric orbit, io twists back and forth with respect to jupiter, at the same time moving nearer and farther from the planet on each revolution. the twisting and flexing heat io, much as repeated flexing of a wire coat hanger heats the wire. after billions of years, this constant flexing and heating have taken their toll on io, driving away water and carbon dioxide and other gases, so that now sulfur and sulfur compounds are the most volatile materials remaining. its interior is entirely melted, and the crust itself is constantly recycled by volcanic activity. in moving inward toward jupiter from callisto to io, we have encountered more and more evidence of geological activity and internal heating, culminating in the violent volcanism on io. three of these surfaces are compared in figure 12.11.
just as the character of the planets in our solar system depends in large measure on their distance from the sun (and on the amount of heat they receive), so it appears that distance from a giant planet like jupiter can play a large role in the composition and evolution of its moons (at least partly due to differences in internal heating of each moon by jupiter’s unrelenting tidal forces). 12.2 • the galilean moons of jupiter 403 [image: astronomy_openstax_page421_img1.jpeg] figure 12.11 three icy moons. these galileo images compare the surfaces of europa, ganymede, and callisto at the same resolution. note that the number of craters (and thus the age of the surface we see) increases as we go from europa to ganymede to callisto. the europa image is one of those where the system of cracks and ridges resembles a freeway system. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl/dlr) in 2023, the european space agency launched the jupiter icy moons explorer spacecraft (abbreviated juice) to explore europa, ganymede, and callisto.
it will arrive in the jupiter system in 2031, fly by the moons of interest, and eventually go into orbit around ganymede. 12.3 titan and triton learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: we shift our attention now to small worlds in the more distant parts of the solar system. saturn’s large moon titan turns out to be a weird cousin of earth, with many similarities in spite of frigid temperatures. the cassini observations of titan have provided some of the most exciting recent discoveries in planetary science. neptune’s moon triton also has unusual characteristics and resembles pluto, which we will discuss in the following section. titan, a moon with atmosphere and hydrocarbon lakes titan, first seen in 1655 by the dutch astronomer christiaan huygens, was the first moon discovered after galileo saw the four large moons of jupiter. titan has roughly the same diameter, mass, and density as callisto or ganymede. presumably it also has a similar composition—about half ice and half rock.
however, titan is unique among moons, with a thick atmosphere and lakes and rivers and falling rain (although these are not composed of water but of hydrocarbons such as ethane and methane, which can stay liquid at the frigid temperatures on titan). titan is the only moon or planet other than earth where we have found evidence of bodies of surface liquids. the 1980 voyager flyby of titan determined that the surface density of its atmosphere is four times greater than that on earth. the atmospheric pressure on this moon is 1.6 bars, higher than that on any other moon and, remarkably, even higher than that of the terrestrial planets mars and earth. the atmospheric composition is primarily nitrogen, an important way in which titan’s atmosphere resembles earth’s.