visible-light interferometers longest baseline (m) telescope name location mirrors status 400 chara array (center for high angular resolution astronomy) mount wilson, ca six 1-m telescopes operational since 2004 200 very large telescope cerro paranal, chile four 8.2-m telescopes completed 2000 85 keck i and ii telescopes maunakea, hi two 10-m telescopes operated from 2001 to 2012 22.8 large binocular telescope mount graham, az two 8.4-m telescopes first light 2004 table 6.3 radar astronomy radar is the technique of transmitting radio waves to an object in our solar system and then detecting the radio radiation that the object reflects back. the time required for the round trip can be measured electronically with great precision. because we know the speed at which radio waves travel (the speed of light), we can determine the distance to the object or a particular feature on its surface (such as a mountain). radar observations have been used to determine the distances to planets and how fast things are moving in the solar system (using the doppler effect, discussed in the radiation and spectra chapter).
radar waves have played important roles in navigating spacecraft throughout the solar system. in addition, as will be discussed in later chapters, radar observations have determined the rotation periods of venus and mercury, probed tiny earth-approaching asteroids, and allowed us to investigate the mountains and valleys on the surfaces of mercury, venus, mars, and the large moons of jupiter. any radio dish can be used as a radar telescope if it is equipped with a powerful transmitter as well as a receiver. for many years, the most spectacular facility in the world for radar astronomy was the 1000-foot (305-meter) telescope at arecibo in puerto rico (figure 6.22). the arecibo telescope was too large to be pointed directly at different parts of the sky. instead, it was constructed in a huge natural “bowl” (more than a mere dish) formed by several hills, and it was lined with reflecting metal panels. a limited ability to track astronomical sources was achieved by moving the receiver system, which was suspended on cables 100 meters above the surface of the bowl. unfortunately, the telescope was seriously damaged in the powerful storms of 2020 and had to be decommissioned.
an even larger (500-meter) radio telescope has recently gone into operation in china and is called the five-hundred-meter aperture spherical telescope (fast). 6.4 • radio telescopes 207 figure 6.22 largest radio and radar dish. the arecibo observatory in puerto rico was the largest and most powerful astronomical radar faculty in the world and was often featured in films. in november 2020 it collapsed, damaging the 300-meter diameter “dish” and destroying the radar transmitter and receiver. (credit: national astronomy and ionosphere center, cornell u., nsf) 6.5 observations outside earth’s atmosphere learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: earth’s atmosphere blocks most radiation at wavelengths shorter than visible light, so we can only make direct ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma ray observations from space (though indirect gamma ray observations can be made from earth). getting above the distorting effects of the atmosphere is also an advantage at visible and infrared wavelengths. the stars don’t “twinkle” in space, so the amount of detail you can observe is limited only by the size of your instrument.
on the other hand, it is expensive to place telescopes into space, and repairs can present a major challenge. this is why astronomers continue to build telescopes for use on the ground as well as for launching into space. airborne and space infrared telescopes water vapor, the main source of atmospheric interference for making infrared observations, is concentrated in the lower part of earth’s atmosphere. for this reason, a gain of even a few hundred meters in elevation can make an important difference in the quality of an infrared observatory site. given the limitations of high mountains, most of which attract clouds and violent storms, and the fact that the ability of humans to perform complex tasks degrades at high altitudes, it was natural for astronomers to investigate the possibility of observing infrared waves from airplanes and ultimately from space. infrared observations from airplanes have been made since the 1960s, starting with a 15-centimeter telescope on board a learjet. from 1974 through 1995, nasa operated a 0.9-meter airborne telescope flying regularly out of the ames research center south of san francisco. observing from an altitude of 12 kilometers, the telescope was above 99% of the atmospheric water vapor.