use the ptolemaic system simulator (https://openstax.org/l/30ptolemaic) to explore how ptolemy's system of deferents and epicycles explained the apparent motion of the planets. however, we shall see in orbits and gravity that the planets, like earth, travel about the sun in orbits that are ellipses, not circles. their actual behavior cannot be represented accurately by a scheme of uniform circular motions. in order to match the observed motions of the planets, ptolemy had to center the deferent circles, not on earth, but at points some distance from earth. in addition, he introduced uniform circular motion around yet another axis, called the equant point. all of these considerably complicated his scheme. it is a tribute to the genius of ptolemy as a mathematician that he was able to develop such a complex system to account successfully for the observations of planets. it may be that ptolemy did not intend for his cosmological model to describe reality, but merely to serve as a mathematical representation that allowed him to predict the positions of the planets at any time.
whatever his thinking, his model, with some modifications, was eventually accepted as authoritative in the muslim world and (later) in christian europe. 2.3 astrology and astronomy learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: many ancient cultures regarded the planets and stars as representatives or symbols of the gods or other supernatural forces that controlled their lives. for them, the study of the heavens was not an abstract subject; it was connected directly to the life-and-death necessity of understanding the actions of the gods and currying favor with them. before the time of our scientific perspectives, everything that happened in nature—from the weather, to diseases and accidents, to celestial surprises such as eclipses or new comets—was thought to be an expression of the whims or displeasure of the gods. any signs that helped people understand what these gods had in mind were considered extremely important. the movements of the seven objects that had the power to “wander” through the realm of the sky—the sun, the moon, and five planets visible to the unaided eye—clearly must have special significance in such a system of thinking. most ancient cultures associated these seven objects with various supernatural rulers in their pantheon and kept track of them for religious reasons.
even in the comparatively sophisticated greece of antiquity, the planets had the names of gods and were credited with having the same powers and influences as the gods whose names they bore. from such ideas was born the ancient system called astrology, still practiced by some people today, in which the positions of these bodies among the stars of the zodiac are thought to hold the key to understanding what we can expect from life. the beginnings of astrology astrology began in babylonia about two and half millennia ago. the babylonians, believing the planets and their motions influenced the fortunes of kings and nations, used their knowledge of astronomy to guide their rulers. when the babylonian culture was absorbed by the greeks, astrology gradually came to influence the link to learning explain the origins of astrology explain what a horoscope is summarize the arguments that invalidate astrology as a scientific practice 50 2 • observing the sky: the birth of astronomy access for free at openstax.org entire western world and eventually spread to asia as well. by the 2nd century bce the greeks democratized astrology by developing the idea that the planets influence every individual.
in particular, they believed that the configuration of the sun, moon, and planets at the moment of birth affected a person’s personality and fortune—a doctrine called natal astrology. natal astrology reached its peak with ptolemy 400 years later. as famous for his astrology as for his astronomy, ptolemy compiled the tetrabiblos, a treatise on astrology that remains the “bible” of the subject. it is essentially this ancient religion, older than christianity or islam, that is still practiced by today’s astrologers. the horoscope the key to natal astrology is the horoscope, a chart showing the positions of the planets in the sky at the moment of an individual’s birth. the word “horoscope” comes from the greek words hora (meaning “time”) and skopos (meaning a “watcher” or “marker”), so “horoscope” can literally be translated as “marker of the hour.” when a horoscope is charted, the planets (including the sun and moon, classed as wanderers by the ancients) must first be located in the zodiac.