if a star is rotating rapidly, there will be a greater spread of doppler shifts and all its spectral lines should be quite broad. in fact, astronomers call this effect line broadening, and the amount of broadening can tell us the speed at which the star rotates (figure 17.14). 17.4 • using spectra to measure stellar radius, composition, and motion 591 [image: astronomy_openstax_page609_img1.jpeg] figure 17.14 using a spectrum to determine stellar rotation. a rotating star will show broader spectral lines than a nonrotating star. measurements of the widths of spectral lines show that many stars rotate faster than the sun, some with periods of less than a day! these rapid rotators spin so fast that their shapes are “flattened” into what we call oblate spheroids. an example of this is the bright star vega, which rotates once every 12.5 hours. vega’s rotation flattens its shape so much that its diameter at the equator is 23% wider than its diameter at the poles. another dramatic example is in the star altair, which rotates in less than 7 hours (figure 17.15).
the sun, with its rotation period of about a month, rotates rather slowly. studies have shown that stars decrease their rotational speed as they age. young stars rotate very quickly, with rotational periods of days or less. very old stars can have rotation periods of several months. 592 17 • analyzing starlight access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page610_img1.jpeg] figure 17.15 comparison of rotating stars. this illustration compares the more rapidly rotating star altair to the slower rotating sun. as you can see, spectroscopy is an extremely powerful technique that helps us learn all kinds of information about stars that we simply could not gather any other way. we will see in later chapters that these same techniques can also teach us about galaxies, which are the most distant objects that can we observe. without spectroscopy, we would know next to nothing about the universe beyond the solar system. astronomy and philanthropy throughout the history of astronomy, contributions from wealthy patrons of the science have made an enormous difference in building new instruments and carrying out long-term research projects. edward pickering’s stellar classification project, which was to stretch over several decades, was made possible by major donations from anna draper.
she was the widow of henry draper, a physician who was one of the most accomplished amateur astronomers of the nineteenth century and the first person to successfully photograph the spectrum of a star. anna draper gave several hundred thousand dollars to harvard observatory. as a result, the great spectroscopic survey is still known as the henry draper memorial, and many stars are still referred to by their “hd” numbers in that catalog (such as hd 209458). in the 1870s, the eccentric piano builder and real estate magnate james lick (figure 17.16) decided to leave some of his fortune to build the world’s largest telescope. when, in 1887, the pier to house the telescope was finished, lick’s body was entombed in it. atop the foundation rose a 36-inch refractor, which for many years was the main instrument at the lick observatory near san jose. making connections 17.4 • using spectra to measure stellar radius, composition, and motion 593 [image: astronomy_openstax_page611_img1.jpeg] figure 17.16 henry draper (1837–1882) and james lick (1796–1876).
(a) draper stands next to a telescope used for photography. after his death, his widow funded further astronomy work in his name. (b) lick was a philanthropist who provided funds to build a 36-inch refractor not only as a memorial to himself but also to aid in further astronomical research. the lick telescope remained the largest in the world until 1897, when george ellery hale persuaded railroad millionaire charles yerkes to finance the construction of a 40-inch telescope near chicago. more recently, howard keck, whose family made its fortune in the oil industry, gave $70 million from his family foundation to the california institute of technology to help build the world’s largest telescope atop the 14,000-foot peak of maunakea in hawaii (see the chapter on astronomical instruments to learn more about these telescopes). the keck foundation was so pleased with what is now called the keck telescope that they gave $74 million more to build keck ii, another 10-meter reflector on the same volcanic peak. now, if any of you become millionaires or billionaires, and astronomy has sparked your interest, do keep an astronomical instrument or project in mind as you plan your estate.