we see that nature, starting with one set of chemical constituents, can fashion a wide range of final 500 14 • cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page518_img1.jpeg] atmospheres appropriate to the conditions and history of each world. the atmosphere we have on earth is the result of many eons of evolution and adaptation. and, as we saw, it can be changed by the actions of the life forms that inhabit the planet. one of the motivations for exploration of our planetary system is the search for life, beginning with a survey for potentially habitable environments. mercury, venus, and the moon are not suitable; neither are most of the moons in the outer solar system. the giant planets, which do not have solid surfaces, also fail the test for habitability. so far, the search for habitable environments has focused on the presence of liquid water. earth and europa both have large oceans, although europa’s ocean is covered with a thick crust of ice. mars has a long history of liquid water on its surface, although the surface today is mostly dry and cold.
however, there is strong evidence for subsurface water on mars, and even today water flows briefly on the surface under the right conditions. enceladus may have the most accessible liquid water, which is squirting into space by means of the geysers observed with our cassini spacecraft. titan is in many ways the most interesting world we have explored. it is far too cold for liquid water, but with its thick atmosphere and hydrocarbon lakes, it may be the best place to search for “life as we don’t know it.” we now come to the end of our study of the planetary system. although we have learned a great deal about the other planets during the past few decades of spacecraft exploration, much remains unknown. discoveries in recent years of geological activity on titan and enceladus were unexpected, as was the complex surface of pluto revealed by new horizons. the study of exoplanetary systems provides a new perspective, teaching us that there is much more variety among planetary systems than scientists had imagined a few decades ago. the exploration of the solar system is one of the greatest human adventures, and, in many ways, it has just begun.
14.5 • planetary evolution 501 key terms accretion the gradual accumulation of mass, as by a planet forming from colliding particles in the solar nebula exoplanet a planet orbiting a star other than our sun iron meteorite a meteorite composed primarily of iron and nickel meteor a small piece of solid matter that enters earth’s atmosphere and burns up, popularly called a shooting star because it is seen as a small flash of light meteor shower many meteors appearing to radiate from one point in the sky; produced when earth passes through a cometary dust stream meteorite a portion of a meteor that survives passage through the atmosphere and strikes the ground stony meteorite a meteorite composed mostly of stony material, either primitive or differentiated stony-iron meteorite a type of differentiated meteorite that is a blend of nickel-iron and silicate materials summary 14.1 meteors when a fragment of interplanetary dust strikes earth’s atmosphere, it burns up to create a meteor. streams of dust particles traveling through space together produce meteor showers, in which we see meteors diverging from a spot in the sky called the radiant of the shower.
many meteor showers recur each year and are associated with particular comets that have left dust behind as they come close to the sun and their ices evaporate (or have broken up into smaller pieces). 14.2 meteorites: stones from heaven meteorites are the debris from space (mostly asteroid fragments) that survive to reach the surface of earth. meteorites are called finds or falls according to how they are discovered; the most productive source today is the antarctic ice cap. meteorites are classified as irons, stony-irons, or stones accordingly to their composition. most stones are primitive objects, dated to the origin of the solar system 4.5 billion years ago. the most primitive are the carbonaceous meteorites, such as murchison and allende. these can contain a number of organic (carbon-rich) molecules. 14.3 formation of the solar system a viable theory of solar system formation must take into account motion constraints, chemical constraints, and age constraints. meteorites, comets, and asteroids are survivors of the solar nebula out of which the solar system formed.