as we continue our voyage into the universe, we will discover that black holes are the key to explaining many mysterious and remarkable objects—including collapsed stars and the active centers of giant galaxies. black holes and curved spacetime 24 [image: astronomy_openstax_page843_img1.jpeg] 24.1 introducing general relativity learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: most stars end their lives as white dwarfs or neutron stars. when a very massive star collapses at the end of its life, however, not even the mutual repulsion between densely packed neutrons can support the core against its own weight. if the remaining mass of the star’s core is more than about three times that of the sun (msun), our theories predict that no known force can stop it from collapsing forever! gravity simply overwhelms all other forces and crushes the core until it occupies an infinitely small volume. a star in which this occurs may become one of the strangest objects ever predicted by theory—a black hole. to understand what a black hole is like and how it influences its surroundings, we need a theory that can describe the action of gravity under such extreme circumstances.
to date, our best theory of gravity is the general theory of relativity, which was put forward in 1916 by albert einstein. general relativity was one of the major intellectual achievements of the twentieth century; if it were music, we would compare it to the great symphonies of beethoven or mahler. until recently, however, scientists had little need for a better theory of gravity; isaac newton’s ideas that led to his law of universal gravitation (see orbits and gravity) are perfectly sufficient for most of the objects we deal with in everyday life. in the past half century, however, general relativity has become more than just a beautiful idea; it is now essential in understanding pulsars, quasars (which will be discussed in active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes), and many other astronomical objects and events, including the black holes we will discuss here. we should perhaps mention that this is the point in an astronomy course when many students start to feel a little nervous (and perhaps wish they had taken botany or some other earthbound course to satisfy the science requirement).
this is because in popular culture, einstein has become a symbol for mathematical brilliance that is simply beyond the reach of most people (figure 24.2). figure 24.2 albert einstein (1879–1955). this famous scientist, seen here younger than in the usual photos, has become a symbol for high intellect in popular culture. (credit: nasa) so, when we wrote that the general theory of relativity was einstein’s work, you may have worried just a bit, convinced that anything einstein did must be beyond your understanding. this popular view is unfortunate discuss some of the key ideas of the general theory of relativity recognize that one’s experiences of gravity and acceleration are interchangeable and indistinguishable distinguish between newtonian ideas of gravity and einsteinian ideas of gravity recognize why the general theory of relativity is necessary for understanding the nature of black holes 826 24 • black holes and curved spacetime access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page844_img1.jpeg] and mistaken.
although the detailed calculations of general relativity do involve a good deal of higher mathematics, the basic ideas are not difficult to understand (and are, in fact, almost poetic in the way they give us a new perspective on the world). moreover, general relativity goes beyond newton’s famous “inverse- square” law of gravity; it helps explain how matter interacts with other matter in space and time. this explanatory power is one of the requirements that any successful scientific theory must meet. the principle of equivalence the fundamental insight that led to the formulation of the general theory of relativity starts with a very simple thought: if you were able to jump off a high building and fall freely, you would not feel your own weight. in this chapter, we will describe how einstein built on this idea to reach sweeping conclusions about the very fabric of space and time itself. he called it the “happiest thought of my life.” einstein himself pointed out an everyday example that illustrates this effect (see figure 24.3). notice how your weight seems to be reduced in a high-speed elevator when it accelerates from a stop to a rapid descent. similarly, your weight seems to increase in an elevator that starts to move quickly upward.