the organic chemistry experiment showed no trace of organic material, which is apparently destroyed on the martian surface by the sterilizing effect of this ultraviolet light. while the possibility of life on the surface has not been eliminated, most experts consider it negligible. although mars has the most earthlike environment of any planet in the solar system, the sad fact is that nobody seems to be home today, at least on the surface. however, there is no reason to think that life could not have begun on mars about 4 billion years ago, at the same time it started on earth. the two planets had very similar surface conditions then. thus, the attention of scientists has shifted to the search for fossil life on mars. one of the primary questions to be addressed by future spacecraft is whether mars once supported its own life forms and, if so, how this martian life compared with that on our own planet. future missions will include the return of martian samples selected from sedimentary rocks at sites that once held water and thus perhaps ancient life. the most powerful searches for martian life (past or present) will thus be carried out in our laboratories here on earth. while the perseverance rover is carefully collecting samples on mars, we have no way at present to return them to earth.
facing budget cuts, nasa has not yet designed the complex mission we will need to collect the tubes containing these samples, launch them into mars' orbit, and transfer them to another rocket for the return voyage to earth. another challenge is to build a sample analysis facility that protects life on earth from contamination by any martian organisms (as discussed further in the following making connections). sterilization of the samples from mars is not an option, since the primary objective of a mars sample return is a search for evidence of life. planetary protection when scientists begin to search for life on another planet, they must make sure that we do not contaminate the other world with life carried from earth. at the very beginning of spacecraft exploration on mars, an international agreement specified that all landers were to be carefully sterilized to avoid accidentally transplanting terrestrial microbes to mars. in the case of viking, we know the sterilization was successful. viking’s failure to detect martian organisms also implies that these experiments did not detect hitchhiking terrestrial microbes. as we have learned more about the harsh conditions on the martian surface, the sterilization requirements have been somewhat relaxed.
it is evident that no terrestrial microbes could grow on the martian surface, with its low temperature, absence of water, and intense ultraviolet radiation. microbes from earth might survive in a dormant, dried state, but they cannot grow and proliferate on mars. the problem of contaminating mars will become more serious, however, as we begin to search for life below the surface, where temperatures are higher and no ultraviolet light penetrates. the situation will be even more daunting if we consider human flights to mars. any humans will carry with them a multitude of making connections 354 10 • earthlike planets: venus and mars access for free at openstax.org terrestrial microbes of all kinds, and it is hard to imagine how we can effectively keep the two biospheres isolated from each other if mars has indigenous life. perhaps the best situation could be one in which the two life-forms are so different that each is effectively invisible to the other—not recognized on a chemical level as living or as potential food. the most immediate issue of public concern is not with the contamination of mars but with any dangers associated with returning mars samples to earth. nasa is committed to the complete biological isolation of returned samples until they are demonstrated to be safe.
even though the chances of contamination are extremely low, it is better to be safe than sorry. most likely there is no danger, even if there is life on mars and alien microbes hitch a ride to earth inside some of the returned samples. in fact, mars is sending samples to earth all the time in the form of the mars meteorites. since some of these microbes (if they exist) could probably survive the trip to earth inside their rocky home, we may have been exposed many times over to martian microbes. either they do not interact with our terrestrial life, or in effect our planet has already been inoculated against such alien bugs. more than any other planet, mars has inspired science fiction writers over the years. you can find scientifically reasonable stories about mars in a subject index of such stories online. if you click on mars (https://openstax.org/l/30marsstories) as a topic, you will find stories by a number of space scientists, including william hartmann, geoffrey landis, and ludek pesek. 10.6 divergent planetary evolution learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: venus, mars, and our own planet earth form a remarkably diverse triad of worlds.