another “environmental threat” to astronomy (besides light pollution) comes from the spilling of terrestrial communications into the “channels”—wavelengths and frequencies—previously reserved for radio astronomy. for example, the demand for cellular phones means that more and more radio channels will be used for this purpose. the faint signals from cosmic radio sources could be drowned in a sea of earthly conversation (translated and sent as radio waves). assume your group is a congressional committee being lobbied by both radio astronomers, who want to save some clear channels for doing astronomy, and the companies that stand to make a lot of money from expanding cellular phone use. what arguments would sway you to each side? f. when the site for the new thirty-meter telescope on hawaii’s maunakea was dedicated, a group of native hawaiians announced opposition to the project because astronomers were building too many telescopes on a mountain that native hawaiians consider a sacred site.
you can read more about this controversy at http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/04/science/space/hawaii-court-rescinds-permit-to-build-thirty-meter- telescope.html?_r=0 and at http://www.nature.com/news/the-mountain-top-battle-over-the-thirty-meter- telescope-1.18446. once your group has the facts, discuss the claims of each side in the controversy. how do you think it should be resolved? g. if you could propose to use a large modern telescope, what would you want to find out? what telescope would you use and why? h. light pollution (spilled light in the night sky making it difficult to see the planets and stars) used to be an issue that concerned mostly astronomers. now spilled light at night is also of concern to environmentalists and those worrying about global warming. can your group come up with some non- 220 6 • collaborative group activities access for free at openstax.org astronomical reasons to be opposed to light pollution? exercises review questions 1. what are the three basic components of a modern astronomical instrument? describe each in one to two sentences. 2.
name the two spectral windows through which electromagnetic radiation easily reaches the surface of earth and describe the largest-aperture telescope currently in use for each window. 3. list the largest-aperture single telescope currently in use in each of the following bands of the electromagnetic spectrum: radio, x-ray, gamma ray. 4. when astronomers discuss the apertures of their telescopes, they say bigger is better. explain why. 5. the hale telescope at palomar observatory has a diameter of 5 m, and the keck i telescope has a diameter of 10 m. how much more light can the keck telescope collect than the hale telescope in the same amount of time? 6. what is meant by “reflecting” and “refracting” telescopes? 7. why are the largest visible-light telescopes in the world made with mirrors rather than lenses? 8. compare the eye, photographic film, and ccds as detectors for light. what are the advantages and disadvantages of each? 9. what is a charge-coupled device (ccd), and how is it used in astronomy? 10. why is it difficult to observe at infrared wavelengths? what do astronomers do to address this difficulty?
11. radio and radar observations are often made with the same antenna, but otherwise they are very different techniques. compare and contrast radio and radar astronomy in terms of the equipment needed, the methods used, and the kind of results obtained. 12. look back at figure 6.18 of cygnus a and read its caption again. the material in the giant lobes at the edges of the image had to have been ejected from the center at least how many years ago? 13. why do astronomers place telescopes in earth’s orbit? what are the advantages for the different regions of the spectrum? 14. what was the problem with the hubble space telescope and how was it solved? 15. describe the techniques radio astronomers use to obtain a resolution comparable to what astronomers working with visible light can achieve. 16. what kind of visible-light and infrared telescopes on the ground are astronomers planning for the future? why are they building them on the ground and not in space? 17. describe one visible-light or infrared telescope that astronomers are planning to launch into space in the future. thought questions 18.