in any case, if the hubble constant is not really a constant when we look over large spans of space and time, then the calculation of galaxy distances using the hubble constant won’t be accurate. as we shall see in the chapter on the big bang, the accurate calculation of distances requires a model for how the hubble constant has changed over time. the farther away a galaxy is (and the longer ago we are seeing it), the more important it is to include the effects of the change in the hubble constant. for galaxies within a few billion light-years, however, the assumption that the hubble constant is indeed constant gives good estimates of distance. models for an expanding universe at first, thinking about hubble’s law and being a fan of the work of copernicus and harlow shapley, you might be shocked. are all the galaxies really moving away from us? is there, after all, something special about our position in the universe? worry not; the fact that galaxies are receding from us and that more distant galaxies are moving away more rapidly than nearby ones shows only that the universe is expanding uniformly. a uniformly expanding universe is one that is expanding at the same rate everywhere.
in such a universe, we and all other observers, no matter where they are located, must observe a proportionality between the velocities and distances of equivalently remote galaxies. (here, we are ignoring the fact that the hubble constant is not constant over all time, but if at any given time in the evolution of the universe the hubble constant has the same value everywhere, this argument still works.) to see why, first imagine a ruler made of stretchable rubber, with the usual lines marked off at each centimeter. now suppose someone with strong arms grabs each end of the ruler and slowly stretches it so that, say, it doubles in length in 1 minute (figure 26.16). consider an intelligent ant sitting on the mark at 2 centimeters—a point that is not at either end nor in the middle of the ruler. he measures how fast other ants, sitting at the 4-, 7-, and 12-centimeter marks, move away from him as the ruler stretches. figure 26.16 stretching a ruler. ants on a stretching ruler see other ants move away from them. the speed with which another ant moves away is proportional to its distance.
the ant at 4 centimeters, originally 2 centimeters away from our ant, has doubled its distance in 1 minute; it therefore moved away at a speed of 2 centimeters per minute. the ant at the 7-centimeters mark, which was originally 5 centimeters away from our ant, is now 10 centimeters away; it thus had to move at 5 centimeters per minute. the one that started at the 12-centimeters mark, which was 10 centimeters away from the ant doing the counting, is now 20 centimeters away, meaning it must have raced away at a speed of 10 centimeters per minute. ants at different distances move away at different speeds, and their speeds are proportional to their distances (just as hubble’s law indicates for galaxies). yet, notice in our example that all 918 26 • galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page936_img1.jpeg] the ruler was doing was stretching uniformly. also, notice that none of the ants were actually moving of their own accord, it was the stretching of the ruler that moved them apart.
now let’s repeat the analysis, but put the intelligent ant on some other mark—say, on 7 or 12 centimeters. we discover that, as long as the ruler stretches uniformly, this ant also finds every other ant moving away at a speed proportional to its distance. in other words, the kind of relationship expressed by hubble’s law can be explained by a uniform stretching of the “world” of the ants. and all the ants in our simple diagram will see the other ants moving away from them as the ruler stretches. for a three-dimensional analogy, let’s look at the loaf of raisin bread in figure 26.17. the chef has accidentally put too much yeast in the dough, and when she sets the bread out to rise, it doubles in size during the next hour, causing all the raisins to move farther apart. on the figure, we again pick a representative raisin (that is not at the edge or the center of the loaf) and show the distances from it to several others in the figure (before and after the loaf expands). figure 26.17 expanding raisin bread. as the raisin bread rises, the raisins “see” other raisins moving away.