this true-color, long-exposure image, made during 70 orbits of earth with the hubble space telescope, shows a small area in the direction of the constellation sculptor. the massive cluster of galaxies named abell 2744 appears in the foreground of this image. it contains several hundred galaxies, and we are seeing them as they looked 3.5 billion years ago. the immense gravity in abell 2744 acts as a gravitational lens (see the astronomy basics feature box on gravitational lensing later in this chapter) to warp space and brighten and magnify images of nearly 3000 distant background galaxies. the more distant galaxies (many of them quite blue) appear as they did more than 12 billion years ago, not long after the big bang. blue galaxies were much more common in that earlier time than they are today. these galaxies appear blue because they are undergoing active star formation and making hot, bright blue stars. (credit: nasa, esa, stsci) we can’t directly detect the changes over time in individual galaxies because they happen too slowly. but we can observe many galaxies at many different cosmic distances and, therefore, look-back times (how far back in time we are seeing the galaxy).
if we can study a thousand very distant “baby” galaxies when the universe was 1 billion years old, and another thousand slightly closer “toddler” galaxies when it was 2 billion years old, and so on until the present 13.8-billion-year-old universe of mature “adult” galaxies near us today, then maybe we can piece together a coherent picture of how the whole ensemble of galaxies evolves over time. this allows us to reconstruct the “life story” of galaxies since the universe began, even though we can’t follow a single galaxy from infancy to old age. fortunately, there is no shortage of galaxies to study. hold up your pinky at arm’s length: the part of the sky blocked by your fingernail contains about one million galaxies, layered farther and farther back in space and time. in fact, the sky is filled with galaxies, all of them, except for andromeda and the magellanic clouds, too faint to see with the naked eye—more than 2 trillion (2000 billion) galaxies in the observable universe, each one with about 100 billion stars.
this cosmic time machine, then, lets us peer into the past to answer fundamental questions about where galaxies come from and how they got to be the way they are today. astronomers call those galactic changes over cosmic time evolution, a word that recalls the work of darwin and others on the development of life on earth. but note that galaxy evolution refers to the changes in individual galaxies over time, while the kind of evolution biologists study is changes in successive generations of living organisms over time. spectra, colors, and shapes astronomy is one of the few sciences in which all measurements must be made at a distance. geologists can take samples of the objects they are studying; chemists can conduct experiments in their laboratories to determine what a substance is made of; archeologists can use carbon dating to determine how old something 28.1 • observations of distant galaxies 957 [image: astronomy_openstax_page975_img1.jpeg] is. but astronomers can’t pick up and play with a star or galaxy. as we have seen throughout this book, if they want to know what galaxies are made of and how they have changed over the lifetime of the universe, they must decode the messages carried by the small number of photons that reach earth.
fortunately (as you have learned) electromagnetic radiation is a rich source of information. the distance to a galaxy is derived from its redshift (how much the lines in its spectrum are shifted to the red because of the expansion of the universe). the conversion of redshift to a distance depends on certain properties of the universe, including the value of the hubble constant and how much mass it contains. we will describe the currently accepted model of the universe in the big bang. for the purposes of this chapter, it is enough to know that the current best estimate for the age of the universe is 13.8 billion years. in that case, if we see an object that emitted its light 6 billion years ago, we are seeing it as it was when the universe was almost 8 billion years old. if we see something that emitted its light 13 billion years ago, we are seeing it as it was when the universe was less than a billion years old. so astronomers measure a galaxy’s redshift from its spectrum, use the hubble constant plus a model of the universe to turn the redshift into a distance, and use the distance and the constant speed of light to infer how far back in time they are seeing the galaxy—the look-back time.