more distant raisins move away faster in a uniformly expanding bread. measure the increases in distance and calculate the speeds for yourself on the raisin bread, just like we did for the ruler. you will see that, since each distance doubles during the hour, each raisin moves away from our selected raisin at a speed proportional to its distance. the same is true no matter which raisin you start with. our two analogies are useful for clarifying our thinking, but you must not take them literally. on both the ruler and the raisin bread, there are points that are at the end or edge. you can use these to pinpoint the middle of the ruler and the loaf. while our models of the universe have some resemblance to the properties of the ruler and the loaf, the universe has no boundaries, no edges, and no center (all mind-boggling ideas that we will discuss in a later chapter). what is useful to notice about both the ants and the raisins is that they themselves did not “cause” their motion. it isn’t as if the raisins decided to take a trip away from each other and then hopped on a hoverboard to get away.
no, in both our analogies, it was the stretching of the medium (the ruler or the bread) that moved the ants or the raisins farther apart. in the same way, we will see in the big bang chapter that the galaxies don’t have rocket motors propelling them away from each other. instead, they are passive participants in the expansion of space. as space stretches, the galaxies are carried farther and farther apart much as the ants and the raisins were. (if this notion of the “stretching” of space surprises or bothers you, now would be a good time to review the information about spacetime in black holes and curved spacetime. we will discuss these ideas further as our discussion broadens from galaxies to the whole universe.) the expansion of the universe, by the way, does not imply that the individual galaxies and clusters of galaxies themselves are expanding. neither raisins nor the ants in our analogy grow in size as the loaf expands. similarly, gravity holds galaxies and clusters of galaxies together, and they get farther away from each 26.5 • the expanding universe 919 [image: astronomy_openstax_page937_img1.jpeg] other—without themselves changing in size—as the universe expands.
920 26 • galaxies access for free at openstax.org key terms elliptical galaxy a galaxy whose shape is an ellipse and that contains no conspicuous interstellar material hubble constant a constant of proportionality in the law relating the velocities of remote galaxies to their distances hubble’s law a rule that the radial velocities of remote galaxies are proportional to their distances from us irregular galaxy a galaxy without any clear symmetry or pattern; neither a spiral nor an elliptical galaxy mass-to-light ratio the ratio of the total mass of a galaxy to its total luminosity, usually expressed in units of solar mass and solar luminosity; the mass-to-light ratio gives a rough indication of the types of stars contained within a galaxy and whether or not substantial quantities of dark matter are present redshift when lines in the spectra are displaced toward longer wavelengths (toward the red end of the visible spectrum) spiral galaxy a flattened, rotating galaxy with pinwheel-like arms of interstellar material and young stars, winding out from its central bulge type ia supernova a supernova formed by the explosion of a white dwarf in a binary system and reach a luminosity of about 4.5 × 109 lsun; can be used to determine distances to galaxies on a large scale summary 26.1 the discovery of galaxies faint star clusters, clouds of glowing gas, and galaxies all appeared as faint patches of light (or nebulae) in the telescopes available at the beginning of the twentieth century.