indeed, the tychonic model is just as accurate as the copernican model, since they are mathematically equivalent (try erasing the orbit for the sun around the earth and then drawing an orbit for the earth around the sun: you have just converted tycho’s system into copernicus’ system). but kepler disagreed with tycho. kepler was totally convinced that heliocentrism was the true model of the heavens based on mystical pythagorean principles of symmetry and beauty. besides, tycho’s model would have the orbit of the sun cross the orbit of mars: how was that supposed to work? kepler was glad to be working with the best data in existence, but he hated that it was being used to support the tychonic model. this all ended when tycho, after a night of drinking and feasting, died of a burst bladder in october, 1601. after wrangling with tycho’s widow, kepler finally inherited tycho’s data. kepler’s war on mars johannes kepler (1571-1630) was the son of a soldier- of-fortune whom he barely knew, and a mother who owned a small property that would be the source of her sorrow.
young johannes showed early promise in school, and managed to win a scholarship to the university of tubingen, in modern-day southwestern germany. there he met michael maistlin, an astronomer and mathematician, who introduced kepler to copernican astronomy, pythagorean mysticism, and astrology. kepler was there ostensibly to study theology, and although he always considered himself to be a good protestant, he could never adhere to every dogma or doctrine of either the lutheran or calvinist sects. this would be the source of lifelong frictions and conflicts with theologians and civil authorities. and it didn’t help that he was friendly with other mathematicians, some of whom were catholic, or, even worse, the despised jesuits. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page435_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 436 figure 477: the platonic solids figure 476: kepler's platonic universe public domain kepler’s first published work, mysterium cosmographicum (the cosmographic mystery, 1596), was a defense of copernican heliocentrism based entirely on mystical pythagorean arguments.
a famous example: why are there just six, and only six, planets? answer: because there are exactly five, and only five, platonic solids. the diagram shows the five platonic solids: the tetrahedron, octahedron, icosahedron, the cube, and the dodecahedron. the pythagoreans had proved that there could be no sixth perfect solid, that is, a solid where every facet is either an equilateral triangle, square, or pentagon. for kepler, this kind of perfection must be mirrored in the heavens, so he produced a model based on this notion. this diagram is from the mysterium cosmographicum showing how spaces between the six planets are filled with the five platonic solids. each sphere (here shown as half-spheres so you can see inside) carries a planet, and between each sphere is a platonic solid nested between them. this is typical mystical pythagorean reasoning, and kepler’s 1596 book is loaded with it.
(kepler sent a copy to galileo, who wrote back a pleasant, but nevertheless, noncommittal reply.) however, the mysterium cosmographicum was popular in scholarly circles, and kepler became known to an international audience. kepler was aware of tycho brahe’s reputation as a keen observer, and heard that he needed help with reducing his observational data for the rudolphine tables. because of a property dispute with one of her neighbors, kepler’s mother was accused by the neighbor of witchcraft. the charges were pursued because the neighbor cut a deal with the local magistrate; this meant that kepler himself was forced to commit his limited resources to her defense, which dragged on for several years, due largely to kepler’s dubious standing with the local clergy. so the opportunity to work with tycho was timely, and saved the magistrate the trouble of expelling him. he arrived in prague in the autumn of 1600.