in a number of places, enough stars have formed together that we recognized them as star clusters (figure 1.11). some of the largest of the star clusters that astronomers have cataloged contain hundreds of thousands of stars and take up volumes of space hundreds of light-years across. 22 1 • science and the universe: a brief tour access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page40_img1.jpeg] figure 1.11 star cluster. this large star cluster is known by its catalog number, m9. it contains some 250,000 stars and is seen more clearly from space using the hubble space telescope. it is located roughly 25,000 light-years away. (credit: nasa, esa) you may hear stars referred to as “eternal,” but in fact no star can last forever. since the “business” of stars is making energy, and energy production requires some sort of fuel to be used up, eventually all stars run out of fuel. this news should not cause you to panic, though, because our sun still has at least 5 or 6 billion years to go.
ultimately, the sun and all stars will die, and it is in their death throes that some of the most intriguing and important processes of the universe are revealed. for example, we now know that many of the atoms in our bodies were once inside stars. these stars exploded at the ends of their lives, recycling their material back into the reservoir of the galaxy. in this sense, all of us are literally made of recycled “star dust.” 1.7 the universe on the large scale in a very rough sense, you could think of the solar system as your house or apartment and the galaxy as your town, made up of many houses and buildings. in the twentieth century, astronomers were able to show that, just as our world is made up of many, many towns, so the universe is made up of enormous numbers of galaxies. (we define the universe to be everything that exists that is accessible to our observations.) galaxies stretch as far into space as our telescopes can see, many billions of them within the reach of modern instruments. when they were first discovered, some astronomers called galaxies island universes, and the term is aptly descriptive; galaxies do look like islands of stars in the vast, dark seas of intergalactic space.
the nearest galaxy, discovered in 1993, is a small one that lies 70,000 light-years from the sun in the direction of the constellation sagittarius, where the smog in our own galaxy makes it especially difficult to discern. (a constellation, we should note, is one of the 88 sections into which astronomers divide the sky, each named after a prominent star pattern within it.) beyond this sagittarius dwarf galaxy lie two other small galaxies, about 160,000 light-years away. first recorded by magellan’s crew as he sailed around the world, these are called the magellanic clouds (figure 1.12). all three of these small galaxies are satellites of the milky way galaxy, interacting with it through the force of gravity. ultimately, all three may even be swallowed by our much larger galaxy, as other small galaxies have been over the course of cosmic time. 1.7 • the universe on the large scale 23 [image: astronomy_openstax_page41_img1.jpeg] figure 1.12 neighbor galaxies.
this image shows both the large magellanic cloud and the small magellanic cloud above the telescopes of the atacama large millimeter/submillimeter array (alma) in the atacama desert of northern chile. (credit: eso, c. malin) the nearest large galaxy is a spiral quite similar to our own, located in the constellation of andromeda, and is thus called the andromeda galaxy; it is also known by one of its catalog numbers, m31 (figure 1.13). m31 is a little more than 2 million light-years away and, along with the milky way, is part of a small cluster of more than 50 galaxies referred to as the local group. 24 1 • science and the universe: a brief tour access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page42_img1.jpeg] figure 1.13 closest spiral galaxy. the andromeda galaxy (m31) is a spiral-shaped collection of stars similar to our own milky way.