if earth were tilted by 5°, the sun’s position on the day of the summer solstice would be 5° n of the celestial equator, so the tropic of cancer would be at the corresponding latitude on earth of 5° n of the equator. the arctic circle would be located at 90° – 5° = 85° n of the equator. check your learning suppose the tilt of earth’s axis were 16°. what, then, would be the difference in latitude between the arctic circle and the tropic of cancer? what would be the effect on the seasons compared with that produced by the actual tilt of 23°? answer: the tropic of cancer is at a latitude equal to earth’s tilt, so in this case, it would be at 16° n latitude. the arctic circle is at a latitude equal to 90° minus earth’s tilt, or 90° – 16° = 74°. the difference between these two latitudes is 74° – 16° = 58°.
since the tilt of earth is less, there would be less variation in the tilt of earth and less variation in the sun’s paths throughout the year, so there would be milder seasonal changes. the columbia university’s center for teaching and learning’s motions of the sun simulator (https://openstax.org/l/30motionsunsim) allows you to see how the sun’s changing altitude over the course of the year changes the intensity of lighting experienced on earth. select the “step by day” option before running the animation to illustrate this effect. many cultures that developed some distance north of the equator have a celebration around december 21 to help people deal with the depressing lack of sunlight and the often dangerously cold temperatures. originally, this was often a time for huddling with family and friends, for sharing the reserves of food and drink, and for rituals asking the gods to return the light and heat and turn the cycle of the seasons around. many cultures constructed elaborate devices for anticipating when the shortest day of the year was coming. stonehenge in england, built long before the invention of writing, is probably one such device.
in our own time, we continue link to learning 4.2 • the seasons 109 the winter solstice tradition with various holiday celebrations around that december date. halfway between the solstices, on about march 21 and september 21, the sun is on the celestial equator. from earth, it appears above our planet’s equator and favors neither hemisphere. every place on earth then receives roughly 12 hours of sunshine and 12 hours of night. the points where the sun crosses the celestial equator are called the vernal (spring) and autumnal (fall) equinoxes. the seasons at different latitudes the seasonal effects are different at different latitudes on earth. near the equator, for instance, all seasons are much the same. every day of the year, the sun is up half the time, so there are approximately 12 hours of sunshine and 12 hours of night. local residents define the seasons by the amount of rain (wet season and dry season) rather than by the amount of sunlight. as we travel north or south, the seasons become more pronounced, until we reach extreme cases in the arctic and antarctic.
at the north pole, all celestial objects that are north of the celestial equator are always above the horizon and, as earth turns, circle around parallel to it. the sun is north of the celestial equator from about march 21 to september 21, so at the north pole, the sun rises when it reaches the vernal equinox and sets when it reaches the autumnal equinox. each year there are 6 months of sunshine at each pole, followed by 6 months of darkness. e x a m p l e 4 . 2 the position of the sun in the sky the sun’s coordinates on the celestial sphere range from a declination of 23° n of the celestial equator (or +23°) to a declination 23° s of the celestial equator (or –23°). so, the sun’s altitude at noon, when it crosses the meridian, varies by a total of 46°. what is the altitude of the sun at noon on march 21, as seen from a place on earth’s equator? what is its altitude on june 21, as seen from a place on earth’s equator? solution on earth’s equator, the celestial equator passes through the zenith.