can you figure out a scheme analogous to leap year to make this calendar work? 51. if a star rises at 8:30 p.m. tonight, approximately what time will it rise two months from now? 52. what is the altitude of the sun at noon on december 22, as seen from a place on the tropic of cancer? 53. show that the gregorian calendar will be in error by 1 day in about 3300 years. 4 • exercises 139 140 4 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 5.1 our sun in ultraviolet light. this photograph of the sun was taken at several different wavelengths of ultraviolet, which our eyes cannot see, and then color coded so it reveals activity in our sun’s atmosphere that cannot be observed in visible light. this is why it is important to observe the sun and other astronomical objects in wavelengths other than the visible band of the spectrum. this image was taken by a satellite from above earth’s atmosphere, which is necessary since earth’s atmosphere absorbs much of the ultraviolet light coming from space.
(credit: modification of work by nasa) chapter outline 5.1 the behavior of light 5.2 the electromagnetic spectrum 5.3 spectroscopy in astronomy 5.4 the structure of the atom 5.5 formation of spectral lines 5.6 the doppler effect thinking ahead the nearest star is so far away that the fastest spacecraft humans have built would take almost 100,000 years to get there. yet we very much want to know what material this neighbor star is composed of and how it differs from our own sun. how can we learn about the chemical makeup of stars that we cannot hope to visit or sample? in astronomy, most of the objects that we study are completely beyond our reach. the temperature of the sun is so high that a spacecraft would be fried long before it reached it, and the stars are much too far away to visit in our lifetimes with the technology now available. even light, which travels at a speed of 300,000 kilometers per second (km/s), takes more than 4 years to reach us from the nearest star. if we want to learn about the sun and stars, we must rely on techniques that allow us to analyze them from a distance.
radiation and spectra 5 [image: astronomy_openstax_page159_img1.jpeg] 5.1 the behavior of light learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: coded into the light and other kinds of radiation that reach us from objects in the universe is a wide range of information about what those objects are like and how they work. if we can decipher this code and read the messages it contains, we can learn an enormous amount about the cosmos without ever having to leave earth or its immediate environment. the visible light and other radiation we receive from the stars and planets is generated by processes at the atomic level—by changes in the way the parts of an atom interact and move. thus, to appreciate how light is generated, we must explore how atoms work. there is a bit of irony in the fact that in order to understand some of the largest structures in the universe, we must become acquainted with some of the smallest. notice that we have twice used the phrase “light and other radiation.” one of the key ideas explored in this chapter is that visible light is not unique; it is merely the most familiar example of a much larger family of radiation that can carry information to us.
the word “radiation” will be used frequently in this book, so it is important to understand what it means. in everyday language, “radiation” is often used to describe certain kinds of energetic subatomic particles released by radioactive materials in our environment. (an example is the kind of radiation used to treat some cancers.) but this is not what we mean when we use the word “radiation” in an astronomy text. radiation, as used in this book, is a general term for waves (including light waves) that radiate outward from a source. as we saw in orbits and gravity, newton’s theory of gravity accounts for the motions of planets as well as objects on earth. application of this theory to a variety of problems dominated the work of scientists for nearly two centuries. in the nineteenth century, many physicists turned to the study of electricity and magnetism, which are intimately connected with the production of light. the scientist who played a role in this field comparable to newton’s role in the study of gravity was physicist james clerk maxwell, born and educated in scotland (figure 5.2).