in some instances we even see entire clusters of galaxies merging together. figure 28.30 formation of cluster of galaxies. this schematic diagram shows how galaxies might have formed if small clouds formed first and then congregated to form galaxies and then clusters of galaxies. most giant elliptical galaxies formed through the collision and merger of many smaller fragments. some spiral galaxies may have formed in relatively isolated regions from a single cloud of gas that collapsed to make a flattened disk, but others acquired additional stars, gas, and dark matter through collisions, and the stars acquired through these collisions now populate their halos and bulges. as we have seen, our milky way is still capturing small galaxies and adding them to its halo, and probably also pulling fresh gas from these galaxies 28.5 • the formation and evolution of galaxies and structure in the universe 995 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1013_img1.jpeg] into its disk.
996 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org key terms cold dark matter slow-moving massive particles, not yet identified, that don’t absorb, emit, or reflect light or other electromagnetic radiation cosmological principle the assumption that, on the large scale, the universe at any given time is the same everywhere—isotropic and homogeneous dark energy an energy that is causing the expansion of the universe to accelerate; the source of this energy is not yet understood evolution (of galaxies) changes in individual galaxies over cosmic time, inferred by observing snapshots of many different galaxies at different times in their lives galactic cannibalism a process by which a larger galaxy strips material from or completely swallows a smaller one homogeneous having a consistent and even distribution of matter that is the same everywhere hot dark matter massive particles, not yet identified, that don’t absorb, emit, or reflect light or other electromagnetic radiation; hot dark matter is faster-moving material than cold dark matter isotropic the same in all directions local group a small cluster of galaxies to which our galaxy belongs merger a collision between galaxies (of roughly comparable size) that combine to form a single new structure starburst a galaxy or merger of multiple galaxies that turns gas into stars much faster than usual supercluster a large region of space (more than 100 million light-years across) where groups and clusters of galaxies are more concentrated; a cluster of clusters of galaxies void a region between clusters and superclusters of galaxies that appears relatively empty of galaxies summary 28.1 observations of distant galaxies when we look at distant galaxies, we are looking back in time.
we have now seen galaxies as they were when the universe was about 300 million years old—only about two percent as old as it is now. the universe now is 13.8 billion years old. the color of a galaxy is an indicator of the age of the stars that populate it. blue galaxies must contain a lot of hot, massive, young stars. galaxies that contain only old stars tend to be yellowish red. the first generation of stars formed when the universe was only a few hundred million years old. galaxies observed when the universe was only a few billion years old tend to be smaller than today’s galaxies, to have more irregular shapes, and to have more rapid star formation than the galaxies we see nearby in today’s universe. this shows that the smaller galaxy fragments assembled themselves into the larger galaxies we see today. 28.2 galaxy mergers and active galactic nuclei when galaxies of comparable size collide and coalesce we call it a merger, but when a small galaxy is swallowed by a much larger one, we use the term galactic cannibalism. collisions play an important role in the evolution of galaxies.
if the collision involves at least one galaxy rich in interstellar matter, the resulting compression of the gas will result in a burst of star formation, leading to a starburst galaxy. mergers were much more common when the universe was young, and many of the most distant galaxies that we see are starburst galaxies that are involved in collisions. active galactic nuclei powered by supermassive black holes in the centers of most galaxies can have major effects on the host galaxy, including shutting off star formation. 28.3 the distribution of galaxies in space counts of galaxies in various directions establish that the universe on the large scale is homogeneous and isotropic (the same everywhere and the same in all directions, apart from evolutionary changes with time). the sameness of the universe everywhere is referred to as the cosmological principle. galaxies are grouped 28 • key terms 997 together in clusters. the milky way galaxy is a member of the local group, which contains at least 54 member galaxies. rich clusters (such as virgo and coma) contain thousands or tens of thousands of galaxies. galaxy clusters often group together with other clusters to form large-scale structures called superclusters, which can extend over distances of several hundred million light-years.