to be able to communicate with other astronomers, understand their communications, and understand the concepts in astronomy you need to understand the terminology. active galactic nuclei the core of an active galaxy. granules small areas on the sun’s surface (about the size of a continent on earth). they are the tops of the solar convection cells. trojan asteroids asteroids that are in the lagrangian points 60 degrees ahead or behind a major planet. t-tauri star a star with violent surface activity in the protostar stage. 21-centimeter radiation radio waves that are emitted when an excited electron in an atom has spin in the same direction as the nucleus drops back to the ground state of antiparallel spin. absorption lines the specific frequencies of light that are absorbed by a cool non-dense gas when light passes through it that vary depending on what element or molecule is in the gas cloud. accretion the act of bits of dust and gas gathering together to form larger bodies through gravitation. active galaxy a galaxy whose core is very active and is emitting more radiation than normal due to the black hole consuming matter. active optics controlling environmental and mechanical fluctuations to improve image quality.
these include improved dome designs, airflow control, mirror temperature control, and mirror shape control. adaptive optics the manipulation of a mirror’s shape to compensate for atmospheric changes in real time, employing a laser- generated star. altitude height above the horizon in degrees, minutes, and seconds. 0 degrees on the horizon. 90 degrees directly overhead (the zenith). amor asteroids asteroids that cross mars’ orbit but not earth’s. amplitude the height of a wave's maximum above the center line. angular resolution the smallest angle between two objects that a telescope can split. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 396 aphrodite terra aphrodite terra – one of the large high altitude areas on venus. apollo asteroids asteroids that have orbits that cross earth’s orbit. associations very large star clusters. asteroid belt the region between mars and jupiter where most asteroids orbit. asteroids large rocky objects. not big enough to become round, but larger than meteoroids. most reside in the asteroid belt between mars and jupiter. atmosphere the gaseous layer above the earth’s crust and hydrosphere. atom the smallest unit of a specific element such as hydrogen or iron.
atomic epoch the first epoch of the matter dominated universe, from 50,000 years to 200 million years after the big bang. the temperature has continued to drop to the point where electrons can combine with the atomic nuclei. aurora the glow in the atmosphere when charged particles spiral into the magnetic poles. the northern lights are really called aurora borealis. the southern lights are really called aurora australis. azimuth direction along the horizon of an object: 0 degrees is north, 90 degrees is east, 180 degrees is south, and 270 degrees is west. balmer series the photons emitted when an electron returns to the first excited state. different electrons come from electrons at different initial excited states. barred spiral galaxies spiral galaxies with a bar of stars crossing the center to which the spiral arms are connected. belts the darker lines on the cloud tops of jupiter. they are lower areas of downward circulation. big bang the term used to describe the start of the universe; the start of all matter, energy, space, and time. binary star systems when two or more stars form from the same nebula and are close enough that they orbit each other.
black dwarf the theoretical endpoint of a stars life when the white dwarf has cooled to the background temperature in space. no stars in the universe have reached this stage. black hole a very large star, at the end of its life. if it is greater than 3 solar masses is will overcome the neutron degeneracy pressure and continue to collapse. gravity is so strong that not even light can escape. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 397 blackbody curve the curve of the different frequencies of light emitted by an object. it is shaped like a hump. blue shift when an object is moving towards you, the lines in the light being emitted are moved in the blue direction (shorter wavelengths). brown dwarf stars objects that form that are too small to have complete nuclear fusion. they are dimmer and smaller than red dwarfs. they may have a short burst of deuterium fusion. callisto jupiter’s outermost galilean moon. unlike the other galilean moons, callisto appears not to be differentiated. caloris basin a large impact basin on mercury.