the brownish gray color of the surface indicates a dusty mixture of rocky material and ice. the bright spots are places where recent impacts have uncovered fresh ice from underneath. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl) most of the asteroids and comets, as well as the smallest moons, were probably never heated to the melting point. however, some of the largest asteroids, such as vesta, appear to be differentiated; others are fragments from differentiated bodies. many of the smaller objects seem to be fragments or rubble piles that are the result of collisions. because most asteroids and comets retain their original composition, they represent relatively unmodified material dating back to the time of the formation of the solar system. in a sense, they act as chemical fossils, helping us to learn about a time long ago whose traces have been erased on larger worlds. temperatures: going to extremes generally speaking, the farther a planet or moon is from the sun, the cooler its surface. the planets are heated by the radiant energy of the sun, which gets weaker with the square of the distance. you know how rapidly the heating effect of a fireplace or an outdoor radiant heater diminishes as you walk away from it; the same effect applies to the sun.
mercury, the closest planet to the sun, has a blistering surface temperature that ranges from 280–430 °c on its sunlit side, whereas the surface temperature on pluto is only about –220 °c, colder than liquid air. mathematically, the temperatures decrease approximately in proportion to the square root of the distance from the sun. pluto is about 30 au at its closest to the sun (or 100 times the distance of mercury) and about 49 au at its farthest from the sun. thus, pluto’s temperature is less than that of mercury by the square root of 100, or a factor of 10: from 500 k to 50 k. in addition to its distance from the sun, the surface temperature of a planet can be influenced strongly by its atmosphere. without our atmospheric insulation (the greenhouse effect, which keeps the heat in), the oceans of earth would be permanently frozen. conversely, if mars once had a larger atmosphere in the past, it could have supported a more temperate climate than it has today.
venus is an even more extreme example, where its thick atmosphere of carbon dioxide acts as insulation, reducing the escape of heat built up at the surface, resulting in temperatures greater than those on mercury. today, earth is the only planet where surface temperatures generally lie between the freezing and boiling points of water. as far as we know, earth is the only planet to support life. 7.2 • composition and structure of planets 239 [image: astronomy_openstax_page257_img1.jpeg] there’s no place like home in the classic film the wizard of oz, dorothy, the heroine, concludes after her many adventures in “alien” environments that “there’s no place like home.” the same can be said of the other worlds in our solar system. there are many fascinating places, large and small, that we might like to visit, but humans could not survive on any without a great deal of artificial assistance. a thick carbon dioxide atmosphere keeps the surface temperature on our neighbor venus at a sizzling 700 k (near 900 °f).
mars, on the other hand, has temperatures generally below freezing, with air (also mostly carbon dioxide) so thin that it resembles that found at an altitude of 30 kilometers (100,000 feet) in earth’s atmosphere. and the red planet is so dry that it has not had any rain for billions of years. the outer layers of the jovian planets are neither warm enough nor solid enough for human habitation. any bases we build in the systems of the giant planets may well have to be in space or one of their moons—none of which is particularly hospitable to a luxury hotel with a swimming pool and palm trees. perhaps we will find warmer havens deep inside the clouds of jupiter or in the ocean under the frozen ice of its moon europa. all of this suggests that we had better take good care of earth because it is the only site where life as we know it could survive. recent human activity may be reducing the habitability of our planet by adding pollutants to the atmosphere, especially the potent greenhouse gas carbon dioxide. human civilization is changing our planet dramatically, and these changes are not necessarily for the better. in a solar system that seems unready to receive us, making earth less hospitable to life may be a grave mistake.