carbon detonation supernova a white dwarf companion in a semi-detached binary star system collects matter from its companion until it reaches 1.4 solar masses (the chandrasekhar limit). at this point the carbon in the white dwarf spontaneously ignites in carbon fusion. cascade an electron returning to its ground state in multiple steps. cassagrain focus the point where the image is in focus in a reflecting telescope after bouncing off the secondary mirror and exiting the tube through the primary mirror. cassagrain telescope a reflecting telescope utilizing the cassegrain focus. cassini division a gap of lower particle density between the a and b rings. catastrophic theory the scientific theory that addresses the irregularities and unusual situations found in the solar system. for example venus’ rotation, the moon, etc. ccd a charged coupled device or digital camera used in astronomy. celestial equator the earth's equator extended out into space. celestial north pole the point in the sky that would be directly over your head if you were standing at the earth's north pole. celestial south pole the point in the sky that would be directly over your head if you were standing at the earth's south pole. celsius the temperature scale most commonly used in the rest of the world.
water freezes at 0 degrees and boils at 100 degrees. chromatic aberration a defect in refracting telescopes due to light of different colors focusing at different focal lengths after passing through the lenses. chromosphere the layer in the sun’s atmosphere above the photosphere. this is the layer that can be seen in hydrogen-alpha solar telescopes. closed universe space is curved enough that the universe curves back and closes on itself. in two dimensions, think of the surface of a sphere. there is no edge and there is no center. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 398 cloud fragmentation the breaking into smaller pieces of a nebula due to gravitational collapse, ultimately resulting in stars. cno cycle an alternative means of forming helium that uses existing carbon in the core of the star. this is more common in stars larger than the sun. comet coma a gas and dust cloud around the comet nucleus. comet nucleus the central object in a comet. comet tails there are two tails. one is composed of ions, one is composed of dust. they always point away from the sun. comets icy bodies that have left their stable orbits beyond neptune and travel in towards the sun.
comparative planetology the study of the planets by comparing them to one another, especially comparing them to earth. condensation theory the scientific theory that describes how planets could form from bits of matter in the solar nebula that stuck together or condensed. it is an add-on to the basic nebular theory. conjunction the point when a superior planet is on the opposite side of the sun from the earth. contact binary a binary star system where both stars have expanded beyond their roche lobes and are sharing material with each other. continental drift the motion of large chunks of the earth’s crust. also known as plate tectonics. continuous spectrum the light emitted from a hot solid, liquid, or dense gas. convection the boiling motion of the earth’s atmosphere as warm air rises and cooler air drops. convection zone the region of the sun’s interior outside the radiation zone. the material in this region is churning like a pot of boiling water. core • the center of the earth or any other differentiated object. often it has an inner core and an outer core. • the center of the sun or any other star.. the place where the fusion takes place. corona the outer solar atmosphere. it is only visible during a total solar eclipse.
coronal mass ejections large amounts of solar material that is blown out into space. coronal hole locations on the surface of the sun where material can freely escape into space. they are most visible in ultraviolet light and are the sources of coronal mass ejections (cmes). cosmic microwave background radiation radio waves left over from soon after the big bang. cosmological constant the number that reflects the curvature of space and is a measure of whether the universe is above or below the astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 399 critical density of matter and energy. cosmological principle that the universe is homogeneous and isotropic. cosmological red shift the red shift due to the expansion of space. coude focus the point where the image is in focus in a reflecting telescope after bouncing off a tertiary mirror and exiting the tube near the bottom end. craters holes left by the impact of meteors and asteroids on the surface of a larger object. crest the high point on the curve of a wave. critical density the exact amount of matter and energy required for the universe to neither collapse in upon itself due to gravity, or to continue to expand forever. critical universe the universe is flat, there is no curvature. it is infinite.