the birth of black holes and galaxies while the connection between quasars and galaxies is increasingly clear, the biggest puzzle of all—namely, how the supermassive black holes in galaxies got started—remains unsolved. observations show that they existed when the universe was very young. one dramatic example is the discovery of a quasar that was already shining when the universe was only 700 million years old. what does it take to create a large black hole so quickly? a related problem is that in order to eventually build black holes containing more than 2 billion solar masses, it is necessary to have giant “seed” black holes with masses at least 2000 times the mass of the sun—and they must somehow have been created shortly after the expansion of the universe began. astronomers are now working actively to develop models for how these seed black holes might have formed. theories suggest that galaxies formed from collapsing clouds of dark matter and gas. some of the gas formed stars, but perhaps some of the gas settled to the center where it became so concentrated that it formed a black hole. if this happened, the black hole could form right away—although this requires that the gas should not be rotating very much initially.
a more likely scenario is that the gas will have some angular momentum (rotation) that will prevent direct collapse to a black hole. in that case, the very first generation of stars will form, and some of them, according to calculations, will have masses hundreds of times that of the sun. when these stars finish burning hydrogen, just a few million years later, the supernovae they end with will create black holes a hundred or so times the mass of the sun. these can then merge with others or accrete the rich gas supply available at these early times. the challenge is growing these smaller black holes quickly enough to make the much larger black holes we see a few hundred million years later. it turns out to be difficult because there are limits on how fast they can accrete matter. these should make sense to you from what we discussed earlier in the chapter. if the rate of accretion becomes too high, then the energy streaming outward from the black hole’s accretion disk will become so strong as to blow away the infalling matter.
what if, instead, a collapsing gas cloud doesn’t form a black hole directly or break up and form a group of regular stars, but stays together and makes one fairly massive star embedded within a dense cluster of thousands of lower mass stars and large quantities of dense gas? the massive star will have a short lifetime and will soon collapse to become a black hole. it can then begin to attract the dense gas surrounding it. but calculations show that the gravitational attraction of the many nearby stars will cause the black hole to zigzag 948 27 • active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes access for free at openstax.org randomly within the cluster and will prevent the formation of an accretion disk. if there is no accretion disk, then matter can fall freely into the black hole from all directions. calculations suggest that under these conditions, a black hole even as small as 10 times the mass of the sun could grow to more than 10 billion times the mass of the sun by the time the universe is a billion years old. scientists are exploring other ideas for how to form the seeds of supermassive black holes, and this remains a very active field of research.
whatever mechanism caused the rapid formation of these supermassive black holes, they do give us a way to observe the youthful universe when it was only about five percent as old as it is now. take a look at some new results (https://openstax.org/l/30chanxrayobser) from the chandra x-ray observatory about the formation of supermassive black holes in the early universe. link to learning 27.3 • quasars as probes of evolution in the universe 949 key terms active galactic nuclei (agn) galaxies that are almost as luminous as quasars and share many of their properties, although to a less spectacular degree; abnormal amounts of energy are produced in their centers active galaxies galaxies that house active galactic nuclei quasar an object of very high redshift that looks like a star but is extragalactic and highly luminous; also called a quasi-stellar object, or qso summary 27.1 quasars the first quasars discovered looked like stars but had strong radio emission. their visible-light spectra at first seemed confusing, but then astronomers realized that they had much larger redshifts than stars.