within four years, this self-directed course of study led him to become the most advanced mathematician in the world. newton is a fascinating figure for historians of science, because there are many facets to his life and work, not all of which are explicable in the light of modern science. in addition to the invention of calculus and the newtonian reflector telescope, not to mention the codifying of the three laws of motion and the first studies in spectroscopy, sir isaac was also a lifelong alchemist and heterodox bible interpreter. indeed, in his later years he considered his scientific work mere diversions from his more important theological speculations, and he always considered his work in alchemy as by far the most important of his practical pursuits. scientific tradition still sees newton as the first true scientist, when it would be more accurate to describe him as the last true alchemist. nevertheless, newton’s solution to the problem of the planets is the one that has come down to our day. he recognized that galileo’s concept of inertia was the key to overthrowing aristotle’s objections to an earth that rotates on its axis.
galileo described how he observed a ship sailing slowly through a harbor, its motion determined by reference to the background of other ships, piers and buildings. as it sailed past, a sailor dropped an object from the top of a mast, and struck the deck at the foot of the mast. from the point of view of the sailor, the astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 444 figure 485: dialogo drawing by borb object fell straight down. but from galileo’s point of view against the background of the harbor, the object moved in a curve, because the object moved forward with the same speed and direction as the moving ship while it was dropping. for newton, all objects on the spinning surface of the earth carry the same speed and direction as the spinning earth. an object dropped from a tower does not land to the west because that object is carried to the east like everything else, including the tower. so the object lands at the base of the tower just like that object dropped from the mast of the moving ship hits the foot of the mast. this tendency to keep moving illustrates the concept of inertia: objects will maintain a state of rest or of constant motion unless acted upon by an external force.
this is newton’s first law of motion. the analysis galileo provided for falling bodies and inertia appeared in his two new sciences. by looking at the problem of the ship in the harbor from two different points of view, that of the sailor and that of galileo on shore, this is the basis for galilean relativity. newton went on to generalize the analysis of problems in physics by using the idea of the reference frame, because what you observe and how you conduct measurements only have meaning when you take fully into account your frame of reference. this is where aristotle got it wrong and galileo got it right. from kepler, newton recognized that for planets to move in elliptical orbits, some force must be acting on them. (otherwise, from the first law, planets would travel in straight lines.) by the 1660’s, a number of natural philosophers had speculated that such a force would be an inverse square force, meaning that the strength of the force would decline as you got farther away as the square of the distance from the source. this idea flows naturally from simple geometry: anything that radiates from a central source in 3-dimensional space does so as an expanding sphere of influence.
a given amount will thus spread out over the surface of that sphere, and as time passes and the sphere gets larger, the amount of that initial influence spreads out and gets less intense. since the surface area of the sphere, from elementary geometry, is 𝐴= 4𝜋𝑟2, the force decreases as the distance increases, and the rate at which that initial influence decreases is related to the square of the radius of the sphere, r. this is the definition of an inverse-square force. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page444_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 445 figure 486: newton's telescope drawing by david brewster figure 487: newton's spectrum public domain so the idea of an inverse square force was bandied about, but the question was, can you actually prove that kepler’s laws must obey an inverse-square force? this was the question that astronomer edmond halley (of halley’s comet fame) put before isaac newton in 1684. this question was the inspiration for philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica (mathematical principles of natural philosophy, 1687), the culminating work of the scientific revolution.