next time you wear some gold jewelry (or give some to your sweetheart), bear in mind that those gold atoms were forged long ago in these kinds of celestial explosions! when supernovae explode, these elements (as well as the ones the star made during more stable times) are ejected into the existing gas between the stars and mixed with it. thus, supernovae play a crucial role in enriching their galaxy with heavier elements, allowing, among other things, the chemical elements that make up earthlike planets and the building blocks of life to become more common as time goes on (figure 23.8). 1 stars in the mass ranges 0.25–8 and 8–10 may later produce a type of supernova different from the one we have discussed so far. these are discussed in the evolution of binary star systems. 2 to tell the full story, there is another way to make and recycle these heavier elements which we will discuss in the milky way galaxy. that is the merger of two neutron stars, which also causes a huge explosion. 23.2 • evolution of massive stars: an explosive finish 787 figure 23.8 kepler supernova remnant.
this image shows the expanding remains of a supernova explosion, which was first seen about 400 years ago by sky watchers, including the famous astronomer johannes kepler. the bubble-shaped shroud of gas and dust is now 14 light-years wide and is expanding at 2,000 kilometers per second (4 million miles per hour). the remnant emits energy at wavelengths from x-rays (shown in blue and green) to visible light (yellow) and into the infrared (red). the expanding shell is rich in iron, which was produced in the star that exploded. the main image combines the individual single-color images seen at the bottom into one multi-wavelength picture. (credit: modification of work by nasa, esa, r. sankrit and w. blair (johns hopkins university)) supernovae are also thought to be the source of many of the high-energy cosmic ray particles discussed in cosmic rays. trapped by the magnetic field of the galaxy, the particles from exploded stars continue to circulate around the vast spiral of the milky way.
scientists speculate that high-speed cosmic rays hitting the genetic material of earth organisms over billions of years may have contributed to the steady mutations—subtle changes in the genetic code—that drive the evolution of life on our planet. in all the ways we have mentioned, supernovae have played a part in the development of new generations of stars, planets, and life. but supernovae also have a dark side. suppose a life form has the misfortune to develop around a star that happens to lie near a massive star destined to become a supernova. such life forms may find themselves snuffed out when the harsh radiation and high-energy particles from the neighboring star’s explosion reach their world. if, as some astronomers speculate, life can develop on many planets around long-lived (lower- mass) stars, then the suitability of that life’s own star and planet may not be all that matters for its long-term evolution and survival. life may well have formed around a number of pleasantly stable stars only to be wiped out because a massive nearby star suddenly went supernova. what is a safe distance to be from a supernova explosion?
a lot depends on the violence of the particular explosion, what type of supernova it is (see the evolution of binary star systems), and what level of destruction we are willing to accept. calculations suggest that a supernova less than 50 light-years away from us would certainly end all life on earth, and that even one 100 light-years away would have drastic consequences for the radiation levels here. one minor extinction of sea creatures about 2 million years ago on earth may actually have been caused by a supernova at a distance of about 120 light-years. the good news is that there are at present no massive stars that promise to become supernovae within 50 light-years of the sun. (this is in part because the kinds of massive stars that become supernovae are overall quite rare.) the massive star closest to us, spica (in the constellation of virgo), is about 260 light-years away, probably a safe distance, even if it were to explode as a supernova in the near future. 788 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page806_img1.jpeg] e x a m p l e 2 3 .