if, as he approaches the event horizon, he sends out a signal once per second according to his clock, we will see the spacing between his signals grow longer and longer until it becomes infinitely long when he reaches the event horizon. (recalling our discussion of gravitational redshift, we could say that if the infalling astronaut uses a blue light to send his signals every second, we will see the light get redder and redder until its wavelength is nearly infinite.) as the spacing between clock ticks approaches infinity, it will appear to us that the astronaut is slowly coming to a stop, frozen in time at the event horizon. in the same way, all matter falling into a black hole will also appear to an outside observer to stop at the event horizon, frozen in place and taking an infinite time to fall through it. but don’t think that matter falling into a black hole will therefore be easily visible at the event horizon. the tremendous redshift will make it very difficult to observe any radiation from the “frozen” victims of the black hole. this, however, is only how we, located far away from the black hole, see things. to the astronaut, his time goes at its normal rate and he falls right on through the event horizon into the black hole.
(remember, this horizon is not a physical barrier, but only a region in space where the curvature of spacetime makes escape impossible.) you may have trouble with the idea that you (watching from far away) and the astronaut (falling in) have such different ideas about what has happened. this is the reason einstein’s ideas about space and time are called 24.5 • black holes 845 theories of relativity. what each observer measures about the world depends on (is relative to) his or her frame of reference. the observer in strong gravity measures time and space differently from the one sitting in weaker gravity. when einstein proposed these ideas, many scientists also had difficulty with the idea that two such different views of the same event could be correct, each in its own “world,” and they tried to find a mistake in the calculations. there were no mistakes: we and the astronaut really would see him fall into a black hole very differently. for the astronaut, there is no turning back. once inside the event horizon, the astronaut, along with any signals from his radio transmitter, will remain hidden forever from the universe outside.
he will, however, not have a long time (from his perspective) to feel sorry for himself as he approaches the black hole. suppose he is falling feet first. the force of gravity that the singularity exerts on his feet is greater than on his head, so he will be stretched slightly. because the singularity is a point, the left side of his body will be pulled slightly toward the right, and the right slightly toward the left, bringing each side closer to the singularity. the astronaut will therefore be slightly squeezed in one direction and stretched in the other. some scientists like to call this process of stretching and narrowing spaghettification. the point at which the astronaut becomes so stretched that he perishes depends on the size of the black hole. for black holes with masses billions of times the mass of the sun, such as those found at the centers of galaxies, the spaghettification becomes significant only after the astronaut passes through the event horizon. for black holes with masses of a few solar masses, the astronaut will be stretched and ripped apart even before he reaches the event horizon. earth exerts similar tidal forces on an astronaut performing a spacewalk.
in the case of earth, the tidal forces are so small that they pose no threat to the health and safety of the astronaut. not so in the case of a black hole. sooner or later, as the astronaut approaches the black hole, the tidal forces will become so great that the astronaut will be ripped apart, eventually reduced to a collection of individual atoms that will continue their inexorable fall into the singularity. from the previous discussion, you will probably agree that jumping into a black hole is definitely a once-in- a-lifetime experience! you can see an engaging explanation (https://openstax.org/l/30ndegtystidfor) of death by black hole by neil degrasse tyson, where he explains the effect of tidal forces on the human body until it dies by spaghettification. watch this national geographic video (https://openstax.org/l/30natgeohole) to see a nice overview of black holes. 24.6 evidence for black holes learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: theory tells us what black holes are like. but do they actually exist?