for example, it is difficult to explain the presence of water on earth and mars if these planets formed in a region where the temperature was too hot for ice to condense, unless the ice or water was brought in later from cooler regions. the extreme example is the observation that there are polar deposits of ice on both mercury and the moon; these are almost certainly formed and maintained by occasional comet impacts. as far as age is concerned, we discussed that radioactive dating demonstrates that some rocks on the surface of earth have been present for at least 3.8 billion years, and that certain lunar samples are 4.4 billion years old. the primitive meteorites all have radioactive ages near 4.5 billion years. the age of these unaltered building blocks is considered the age of the planetary system. the similarity of the measured ages tells us that planets formed and their crusts cooled within a few tens of millions of years (at most) of the beginning of the solar system. further, detailed examination of primitive meteorites indicates that they are made primarily from material that condensed or coagulated out of a hot gas; few identifiable fragments appear to have survived from before this hot-vapor stage 4.5 billion years ago.
the solar nebula all the foregoing constraints are consistent with the general idea, introduced in other worlds: an introduction to the solar system, that the solar system formed 4.5 billion years ago out of a rotating cloud of vapor and dust—which we call the solar nebula—with an initial composition similar to that of the sun today. as the solar nebula collapsed under its own gravity, material fell toward the center, where things became more and more concentrated and hot. increasing temperatures in the shrinking nebula vaporized most of the solid material that was originally present. at the same time, the collapsing nebula began to rotate faster through the conservation of angular momentum (see the orbits and gravity and earth, moon, and sky chapters). like a figure skater pulling her arms in to spin faster, the shrinking cloud spun more quickly as time went on. now, think about how a round object spins. close to the poles, the spin rate is slow, and it gets faster as you get closer to the equator. in the same way, near the poles of the nebula, where orbits were slow, the nebular material fell directly into the center.
faster moving material, on the other hand, collapsed into a flat disk revolving around the central object (figure 14.11). the existence of this disk-shaped rotating nebula explains the primary motions in the solar system that we discussed in the previous section. and since they formed from a rotating disk, the planets all orbit the same way. 14.3 • formation of the solar system 487 figure 14.11 steps in forming the solar system. this illustration shows the steps in the formation of the solar system from the solar nebula. as the nebula shrinks, its rotation causes it to flatten into a disk. much of the material is concentrated in the hot center, which will ultimately become a star. away from the center, solid particles can condense as the nebula cools, giving rise to planetesimals, the building blocks of the planets and moons. picture the solar nebula at the end of the collapse phase, when it was at its hottest. with no more gravitational energy (from material falling in) to heat it, most of the nebula began to cool. the material in the center, however, where it was hottest and most crowded, formed a star that maintained high temperatures in its immediate neighborhood by producing its own energy.
turbulent motions and magnetic fields within the disk can drain away angular momentum, robbing the disk material of some of its spin. this allowed some material to continue to fall into the growing star, while the rest of the disk gradually stabilized. the temperature within the disk decreased with increasing distance from the sun, much as the planets’ temperatures vary with position today. as the disk cooled, the gases interacted chemically to produce compounds; eventually these compounds condensed into liquid droplets or solid grains. this is similar to the process by which raindrops on earth condense from moist air as it rises over a mountain. let’s look in more detail at how material condensed at different places in the maturing disk (figure 14.12). the first materials to form solid grains were the metals and various rock-forming silicates. as the temperature dropped, these were joined throughout much of the solar nebula by sulfur compounds and by carbon- and water-rich silicates, such as those now found abundantly among the asteroids. however, in the inner parts of the disk, the temperature never dropped low enough for such materials as ice or carbonaceous organic compounds to condense, so they were lacking on the innermost planets.