such exactness first led the scientists to speculate that perhaps they had found signals from an intelligent civilization. radio astronomers even half-jokingly dubbed the source “lgm” for “little green men.” soon, however, three similar sources were discovered in widely separated directions in the sky. when it became apparent that this type of radio source was fairly common, astronomers concluded that they were highly unlikely to be signals from other civilizations. by today, over 3000 such sources have been discovered; they are now called pulsars, short for “pulsating radio sources.” explain the research method that led to the discovery of neutron stars, located hundreds or thousands of light-years away describe the features of a neutron star that allow it to be detected as a pulsar list the observational evidence that links pulsars and neutron stars to supernovae 23.4 • pulsars and the discovery of neutron stars 797 the pulse periods of different pulsars range from a little longer than 1/1000 of a second to nearly 10 seconds. at first, the pulsars seemed particularly mysterious because nothing could be seen at their location on visible- light photographs.
but then a pulsar was discovered right in the center of the crab nebula, a cloud of gas produced by sn 1054, a supernova that was recorded by the chinese in 1054 (figure 23.14). the energy from the crab nebula pulsar arrives in sharp bursts that occur 30 times each second—with a regularity that would be the envy of a swiss watchmaker. in addition to pulses of radio energy, we can observe pulses of visible light and x-rays from the crab nebula. the fact that the pulsar was just in the region of the supernova remnant where we expect the leftover neutron star to be immediately alerted astronomers that pulsars might be connected with these elusive “corpses” of massive stars. figure 23.14 crab nebula. this image shows x-ray emissions from the crab nebula, which is about 6500 light-years away. the pulsar is the bright spot at the center of the concentric rings. data taken over about a year show that particles stream away from the inner ring at about half the speed of light. the jet that is perpendicular to this ring is a stream of matter and antimatter electrons also moving at half the speed of light.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/cxc/sao) the crab nebula is a fascinating object. the whole nebula glows with radiation at many wavelengths, and its overall energy output is more than 100,000 times that of the sun—not a bad trick for the remnant of a supernova that exploded almost a thousand years ago. astronomers soon began to look for a connection between the pulsar and the large energy output of the surrounding nebula. read the transcript of an interesting interview (https://openstax.org/l/30jocbellint) with jocelyn bell (burnell) to learn about her life and work (this is part of a project at the american institute of physics to record interviews with pathbreaking scientists while they are still alive). both the hubble and james webb space telescopes have taken beautiful, detailed images of the crab nebula. you can compare the two images (https://openstax.org/l/30crabnebslide) using a handy slider tool. and you can read more about the difference between the pictures in this news release (https://openstax.org/l/30crabnebnews) about the james webb image.
a spinning lighthouse model by applying a combination of theory and observation, astronomers eventually concluded that pulsars must be spinning neutron stars. according to this model, a neutron star is something like a lighthouse on a rocky coast (figure 23.15). to warn ships in all directions and yet not cost too much to operate, the light in a modern lighthouse turns, sweeping its beam across the dark sea. from the vantage point of a ship, you see a pulse of link to learning 798 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page816_img1.jpeg] light each time the beam points in your direction. in the same way, radiation from a small region on a neutron star sweeps across the oceans of space, giving us a pulse of radiation each time the beam points toward earth. figure 23.15 lighthouse. a lighthouse in california warns ships on the ocean not to approach too close to the dangerous shoreline. the lighted section at the top rotates so that its beam can cover all directions. (credit: anita ritenour) neutron stars are ideal candidates for such a job because the collapse has made them so small that they can turn very rapidly.