if you lie back in an open field and observe the night sky for hours, as ancient shepherds and travelers regularly did, you will see stars rising on the eastern horizon (just as the sun and moon do), moving across the dome of the sky in the course of the night, and setting on the western horizon. watching the sky turn like this night after night, you might eventually get the idea that the dome of the sky is really part of a great sphere define the main features of the celestial sphere explain the system astronomers use to describe the sky describe how motions of the stars appear to us on earth describe how motions of the sun, moon, and planets appear to us on earth understand the modern meaning of the term constellation 34 2 • observing the sky: the birth of astronomy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page52_img1.jpeg] that is turning around you, bringing different stars into view as it turns. the early greeks regarded the sky as just such a celestial sphere (figure 2.3). some thought of it as an actual sphere of transparent crystalline material, with the stars embedded in it like tiny jewels. figure 2.3 circles on the celestial sphere.
here we show the (imaginary) celestial sphere around earth, on which objects are fixed, and which rotates around earth on an axis. in reality, it is earth that turns around this axis, creating the illusion that the sky revolves around us. note that earth in this picture has been tilted so that your location is at the top and the north pole is where the n is. the apparent motion of celestial objects in the sky around the pole is shown by the circular arrow. today, we know that it is not the celestial sphere that turns as night and day proceed, but rather the planet on which we live. we can put an imaginary stick through earth’s north and south poles, representing our planet’s axis. it is because earth turns on this axis every 24 hours that we see the sun, moon, and stars rise and set with clockwork regularity. today, we know that these celestial objects are not really on a dome, but at greatly varying distances from us in space. nevertheless, it is sometimes still convenient to talk about the celestial dome or sphere to help us keep track of objects in the sky. there is even a special theater, called a planetarium, in which we project a simulation of the stars and planets onto a white dome.
as the celestial sphere rotates, the objects on it maintain their positions with respect to one another. a grouping of stars such as the big dipper has the same shape during the course of the night, although it turns with the sky. during a single night, even objects we know to have significant motions of their own, such as the nearby planets, seem fixed relative to the stars. only meteors—brief “shooting stars” that flash into view for just a few seconds—move appreciably with respect to other objects on the celestial sphere. (this is because they are not stars at all. rather, they are small pieces of cosmic dust, burning up as they hit earth’s atmosphere.) we can use the fact that the entire celestial sphere seems to turn together to help us set up systems for keeping track of what things are visible in the sky and where they happen to be at a given time. 2.1 • the sky above 35 [image: astronomy_openstax_page53_img1.jpeg] celestial poles and celestial equator to help orient us in the turning sky, astronomers use a system that extends earth’s axis points into the sky. imagine a line going through earth, connecting the north and south poles.
this is earth’s axis, and earth rotates about this line. if we extend this imaginary line outward from earth, the points where this line intersects the celestial sphere are called the north celestial pole and the south celestial pole. as earth rotates about its axis, the sky appears to turn in the opposite direction around those celestial poles (figure 2.4). we also (in our imagination) throw earth’s equator onto the sky and call this the celestial equator. it lies halfway between the celestial poles, just as earth’s equator lies halfway between our planet’s poles. figure 2.4 circling the south celestial pole. this long-exposure photo shows trails left by stars as a result of the apparent rotation of the celestial sphere around the south celestial pole. (in reality, it is earth that rotates.) (credit: eso/iztok bončina) now let’s imagine how riding on different parts of our spinning earth affects our view of the sky. the apparent motion of the celestial sphere depends on your latitude (position north or south of the equator). first of all, notice that earth’s axis is pointing at the celestial poles, so these two points in the sky do not appear to turn.