one of its most important discoveries was the verification of water ice (first detected by radar) in craters near the poles, similar to the situation on the moon, and the unexpected discovery of organic (carbon-rich) compounds mixed with the water ice. scientists working with data from the messenger mission (https://openstax.org/l/30messmercuryrt) put together a rotating globe of mercury, in false color, showing some of the variations in the composition of the planet’s surface. you can watch it spin. figure 9.22 mercury’s topography. the topography of mercury’s northern hemisphere is mapped in great detail from messenger data. the lowest regions are shown in purple and blue, and the highest regions are shown in red. the difference in elevation between the lowest and highest regions shown here is roughly 10 kilometers. the permanently shadowed low-lying craters near the north pole contain radar-bright water ice. (credit: modification of work by nasa/johns hopkins university applied physics laboratory/carnegie institution of washington) link to learning 9.5 • mercury 311 [image: astronomy_openstax_page329_img1.jpeg] figure 9.23 caloris basin.
this partially flooded impact basin is the largest known structural feature on mercury. the smooth plains in the interior of the basin have an area of almost two million square kilometers. compare this photo with figure 9.11, the orientale basin on the moon. (credit: nasa/johns hopkins university applied physics laboratory/carnegie institution of washington) most of the mercurian features have been named in honor of artists, writers, composers, and other contributors to the arts and humanities, in contrast with the scientists commemorated on the moon. among the named craters are bach, shakespeare, tolstoy, van gogh, and scott joplin. there is no evidence of plate tectonics on mercury. however, the planet’s distinctive long scarps can sometimes be seen cutting across craters; this means the scarps must have formed later than the craters (figure 9.24). these long, curved cliffs appear to have their origin in the slight compression of mercury’s crust. apparently, at some point in its history, the planet shrank, wrinkling the crust, and it must have done so after most of the craters on its surface had already formed.
if the standard cratering chronology applies to mercury, this shrinkage must have taken place during the last 4 billion years and not during the solar system’s early period of heavy bombardment. figure 9.24 discovery scarp on mercury. this long cliff, nearly 1 kilometer high and more than 100 kilometers long, cuts across several craters. astronomers conclude that the compression that made “wrinkles” like this in the planet's surface must have taken place after the craters were formed. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl/northwestern university) the origin of mercury the problem with understanding how mercury formed is the reverse of the problem posed by the composition of the moon. we have seen that, unlike the moon, mercury is composed mostly of metal. however, 312 9 • cratered worlds access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page330_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page330_img2.jpeg] astronomers think that mercury should have formed with roughly the same ratio of metal to silicate as that found on earth or venus. how did it lose so much of its rocky material?
the most probable explanation for mercury’s silicate loss may be similar to the explanation for the moon’s lack of a metal core. mercury is likely to have experienced several giant impacts very early in its youth, and one or more of these may have torn away a fraction of its mantle and crust, leaving a body dominated by its iron core. a recent alternative explanation suggests that, early on, heat from the young sun evaporated much of the lighter, more volatile, silicates in the material that formed mercury, leaving the planet with a majority of metals. you can follow some of nasa’s latest research on mercury (https://openstax.org/l/30nasaresmercu) and see some helpful animations on the messenger web page. today, astronomers recognize that the early solar system was a chaotic place, with the final stages of planet formation characterized by impacts of great violence. some objects of planetary mass have been destroyed, whereas others could have fragmented and then re-formed, perhaps more than once. both the moon and mercury, with their strange compositions, bear testimony to the catastrophes that must have characterized the solar system during its youth.