can we find a way for our black hole and its accretion disk to produce these jets of energetic particles as well? many different observations have now traced these jets to within 3 to 30 light-years of the parent quasar or galactic nucleus. while the black hole and accretion disk are typically smaller than 1 light-year, we nevertheless presume that if the jets come this close, they probably originate in the vicinity of the black hole. another characteristic of the jets we need to explain is that they contain matter moving close to the speed of light. 940 27 • active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page958_img1.jpeg] why are energetic electrons and other particles near a supermassive black hole ejected into jets, and often into two oppositely directed jets, rather than in all directions? again, we must use theoretical models and supercomputer simulations of what happens when a lot of material whirls inward in a crowded black hole accretion disk. although there is no agreement on exactly how jets form, it has become clear that any material escaping from the neighborhood of the black hole has an easier time doing so perpendicular to the disk.
in some ways, the inner regions of black hole accretion disks resemble a baby that is just learning to eat by herself. as much food as goes into the baby’s mouth can sometimes wind up being spit out in various directions. in the same way, some of the material whirling inward toward a black hole finds itself under tremendous pressure and orbiting with tremendous speed. under such conditions, simulations show that a significant amount of material can be flung outward—not back along the disk, where more material is crowding in, but above and below the disk. if the disk is thick (as it tends to be when a lot of material falls in quickly), it can channel the outrushing material into narrow beams perpendicular to the disk (figure 27.12). figure 27.12 models of accretion disks. these schematic drawings show what accretion disks might look like around large black holes for (a) a thin accretion disk and (b) a “fat” disk—the type needed to account for channeling the outflow of hot material into narrow jets oriented perpendicular to the disk. figure 27.13 shows observations of an elliptical galaxy that behaves in exactly this way.
at the center of this active galaxy, there is a ring of dust and gas about 400 light-years in diameter, surrounding a 1.2-billion-msun black hole. radio observations show that two jets emerge in a direction perpendicular to the ring, just as the model predicts. 27.2 • supermassive black holes: what quasars really are 941 [image: astronomy_openstax_page959_img1.jpeg] figure 27.13 jets and disk in an active galaxy. the picture on the left shows the active elliptical galaxy ngc 4261, which is located in the virgo cluster at a distance of about 100 million light-years. the galaxy itself—the white circular region in the center—is shown the way it looks in visible light, while the jets are seen at radio wavelengths. a hubble space telescope image of the central portion of the galaxy is shown on the right. it contains a ring of dust and gas about 800 light-years in diameter, surrounding a supermassive black hole. note that the jets emerge from the galaxy in a direction perpendicular to the plane of the ring.
(credit: modification of work by esa/hst) quasars and the attitudes of astronomers the discovery of quasars in the early 1960s was the first in a series of surprises astronomers had in store. within another decade they would find neutron stars (in the form of pulsars), the first hints of black holes (in binary x-ray sources), and even the radio echo of the big bang itself. many more new discoveries lay ahead. as maarten schmidt reminisced in 1988, “this had, i believe, a profound impact on the conduct of those practicing astronomy. before the 1960s, there was much authoritarianism in the field. new ideas expressed at meetings would be instantly judged by senior astronomers and rejected if too far out.” we saw a good example of this in the trouble chandrasekhar had in finding acceptance for his ideas about the death of stars with cores greater than 1.4 msun (see the feature box on subrahmanyan chandrasekhar). “the discoveries of the 1960s,” schmidt continued, “were an embarrassment, in the sense that they were totally unexpected and could not be evaluated immediately.