the most common ices in the grains are water (h2o), methane (ch4), and ammonia (nh3)—all built out of atoms that are especially abundant in the realm of the stars. the ice mantles, in turn, are sites for some of the chemical reactions that produce complex organic molecules. figure 20.16 model of an interstellar dust grain. a typical interstellar grain is thought to consist of a core of rocky material (silicates) or graphite, surrounded by a mantle of ices. typical grain sizes are 10–8 to 10–7 meters. (this is from 1/100 to 1/10 of a micron; by contrast, human hair is about 10–200 microns wide.) typical individual grains must be just slightly smaller than the wavelength of visible light. if the grains were a lot smaller, they would not block the light efficiently, as figure 20.13 and other images in this chapter show that it does. on the other hand, if the dust grains were much larger than the wavelength of light, then starlight would not be reddened. things that are much larger than the wavelength of light would block both blue and red light with equal efficiency.
in this way we can deduce that a characteristic interstellar dust grain contains 106 to 109 20.3 • cosmic dust 685 [image: astronomy_openstax_page703_img1.jpeg] atoms and has a diameter of 10–8 to 10–7 meters (10 to 100 nanometers). this is actually more like the specks of solid matter in cigarette smoke than the larger grains of dust you might find under your desk when you are too busy studying astronomy to clean properly. 20.4 cosmic rays learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: in addition to gas and dust, a third class of particles, noteworthy for the high speeds with which they travel, is found in interstellar space. cosmic rays were discovered in 1911 by an austrian physicist, victor hess, who flew simple instruments aboard balloons and showed that high-speed particles arrive at earth from space (figure 20.17). the term “cosmic ray” is misleading, implying it might be like a ray of light, but we are stuck with the name. they are definitely particles and have nearly the same composition as ordinary interstellar gas.
their behavior, however, is radically different from the gas we have discussed so far. figure 20.17 victor hess (1883–1964). cosmic-ray pioneer victor hess returns from a 1912 balloon flight that reached an altitude of 5.3 kilometers. it was on such balloon flights that hess discovered cosmic rays. the nature of cosmic rays cosmic rays are mostly high-speed atomic nuclei and electrons. speeds equal to 90% of the speed of light are typical. almost 90% of the cosmic rays are hydrogen nuclei (protons) stripped of their accompanying electron. helium and heavier nuclei constitute about 9% more. about 1% of cosmic rays have masses equal to the mass of the electron, and 10–20% of these carry positive charge rather than the negative charge that characterizes electrons. a positively charged particle with the mass of an electron is called a positron and is a form of antimatter (we discussed antimatter in the sun: a nuclear powerhouse). the abundances of various atomic nuclei in cosmic rays mirror the abundances in stars and interstellar gas, with one important exception.
the light elements lithium, beryllium, and boron are far more abundant in cosmic rays than in the sun and stars. these light elements are formed when high-speed, cosmic-ray nuclei of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen collide with protons in interstellar space and break apart. (by the way, if you, like most readers, have not memorized all the elements and want to see how any of those we mention fit into the sequence of elements, you will find them all listed in appendix k in order of the number of protons they contain.) define cosmic rays and describe their composition explain why it is hard to study the origin of cosmic rays, and the current leading hypotheses about where they might come from 686 20 • between the stars: gas and dust in space access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page704_img1.jpeg] cosmic rays reach earth in substantial numbers, and we can determine their properties either by capturing them directly or by observing the reactions that occur when they collide with atoms in our atmosphere. the total energy deposited by cosmic rays in earth’s atmosphere is only about one-billionth the energy received from the sun, but it is comparable to the energy received in the form of starlight.