at this temperature, an appreciable number of hydrogen atoms are excited to the second energy level. they can then absorb additional photons, rise to still- higher levels of excitation, and produce a dark absorption line. similarly, every other chemical element, in each of its possible stages of ionization, has a characteristic temperature at which it is most effective in producing absorption lines in any particular part of the spectrum. classification of stellar spectra astronomers use the patterns of lines observed in stellar spectra to sort stars into a spectral class. because a star’s temperature determines which absorption lines are present in its spectrum, these spectral classes are a measure of its surface temperature. there are seven standard spectral classes. from hottest to coldest, these seven spectral classes are designated o, b, a, f, g, k, and m. recently, astronomers have added three additional classes for even cooler objects—l, t, and y. at this point, you may be looking at these letters with wonder and asking yourself why astronomers didn’t call the spectral types a, b, c, and so on. you will see, as we tell you the history, that it’s an instance where tradition won out over common sense.
in the 1880s, williamina fleming devised a system to classify stars based on the strength of hydrogen absorption lines. spectra with the strongest lines were classified as “a” stars, the next strongest “b,” and so on down the alphabet to “o” stars, in which the hydrogen lines were very weak. but we saw above that hydrogen lines alone are not a good indicator for classifying stars, since their lines disappear from the visible light spectrum when the stars get too hot or too cold. in the 1890s, annie jump cannon revised this classification system, focusing on just a few letters from the original system: a, b, f, g, k, m, and o. instead of starting over, cannon also rearranged the existing classes—in order of decreasing temperature—into the sequence we have learned: o, b, a, f, g, k, m. as you can read in the feature on annie cannon: classifier of the stars in this chapter, she classified around 500,000 stars over her lifetime, classifying up to three stars per minute by looking at the stellar spectra.
580 17 • analyzing starlight access for free at openstax.org for a deep dive into spectral types, explore the interactive project at the sloan digital sky survey (https://openstax.org/l/30sloandigsky) in which you can practice classifying stars yourself. to help astronomers remember this crazy order of letters, cannon created a mnemonic, “oh be a fine girl, kiss me.” (if you prefer, you can easily substitute “guy” for “girl.”) other mnemonics, which we hope will not be relevant for you, include “oh brother, astronomers frequently give killer midterms” and “oh boy, an f grade kills me!” with the new l, t, and y spectral classes, the mnemonic might be expanded to “oh be a fine girl (guy), kiss me like that, yo!” each of these spectral classes, except possibly for the y class which is still being defined, is further subdivided into 10 subclasses designated by the numbers 0 through 9. a b0 star is the hottest type of b star; a b9 star is the coolest type of b star and is only slightly hotter than an a0 star.
and just one more item of vocabulary: for historical reasons, astronomers call all the elements heavier than helium metals, even though most of them do not show metallic properties. (if you are getting annoyed at the peculiar jargon that astronomers use, just bear in mind that every field of human activity tends to develop its own specialized vocabulary. just try reading a credit card or social media agreement form these days without training in law!) let’s take a look at some of the details of how the spectra of the stars change with temperature. (it is these details that allowed annie cannon to identify the spectral types of stars as quickly as three per minute!) as figure 17.5 shows, in the hottest o stars (those with temperatures over 28,000 k), only lines of ionized helium and highly ionized atoms of other elements are conspicuous. hydrogen lines are strongest in a stars with atmospheric temperatures of about 10,000 k. ionized metals provide the most conspicuous lines in stars with temperatures from 6000 to 7500 k (spectral type f). in the coolest m stars (below 3500 k), absorption bands of titanium oxide and other molecules are very strong. by the way, the spectral class assigned to the sun is g2.