[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page126_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 127 figure 162: sputnik component 40 – solar system exploration we can do much by studying the planets from earth, but the closer you get, the more you know. getting close to a planet is the first step. if you can spend more time there, then you can learn even more. if you can touch the planet, then whole new frontiers are available to you. and if humans can touch it personally, then you have the ability to learn almost everything about the object. the first objective is to reach space. in 1957, the soviet union launched sputnik 1. this was the first man-made object to attain earth orbit. it was in orbit for 92 days. to hear the sounds of sputnik 1 go to the webste: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r-bqeiklsk8 types of exploration exploration of the solar system is done in stages. each stage is more difficult to accomplish but yields much more information. sometimes stages are combined.
stages of solar system exploration (from easiest to most difficult): • fly-by: this is the simplest mission from a trajectory perspective. the intent is to get the spacecraft close to the planet. it provides astronomers with detailed information on the gravity and mass of the planet as well as returns some close up pictures of the planet and some of its moons. it will indicate if there is an atmosphere around the planet, its composition, and whether there are rings. • orbital: to accomplish a stable orbit requires more accurate positioning of the spacecraft. but once in orbit it is possible to map the entire planet’s surface in high resolution. you can also map the planet spectroscopically to gain information on the composition of its crust. • lander: some landers are crash landers. on the way through the atmosphere the spacecraft can develop a profile of the structure of the atmosphere. the spacecraft then hits the planet hard enough to eject material from the crust. this gives astronomers the opportunity to study below the surface. this will often provide the opportunity to look for water under the surface. more science can be done with a soft landing. it requires more preparation to provide a spacecraft that can control its decent to the planet’s surface.
this provides a means to take samples of the surface and to [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page127_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 128 the moon and the earth are the only two places that humans have walked figure 163: pioneer 4 study their composition in detail using on-board instrumentation. the lander may also dig into the surface searching for the presence of frozen subsurface water. • sample return: this mission increases the complexity again. not only must the lander safely descend to the planet’s surface, but it must also have the ability to do a lift off and return flight to earth. to study the material on the surface of a planet in more detail it is necessary to bring some of it back to earth to study in laboratories by geologists. • rover: if you can provide a lander that can move to additional areas of the surface of a planet, then you can search for signs of water and perhaps signs of life. it lets the equipment take samples from different places and gives scientists the choice of which areas to pursue. • human visit: the most difficult missions are those that involve human participation.
not only do you have all of the previously mentioned challenges, but you also need to provide life support for the people. but this form of exploration also provides the greatest rewards. humans will notice things that robotic missions will miss. based on those observations, it is possible to modify missions to investigate interesting areas. the moon the easiest member of the solar system to visit beyond the earth is the moon. it is relatively nearby. the moon is the only place that humans have visited beyond the earth. some accomplishments in investigating the moon include: • 1959 – pioneer 4 (united states). fly-by mission that was at too great a distance to return useful information from the on-board instrumentation. this was the first mission to successfully leave earth orbit. • 1959 – luna 2 (soviet union). this mission was a crash landing. this was the first mission to reach the moon’s surface. • 1959 – luna 3 (soviet union). this mission was the first spacecraft to orbit the moon. it was the first time that we could see the far side of the moon.