while the short bright lines in the sky made by individual meteors could, in theory, be traced back to a radiant point (as shown in figure 14.3), the quick blips of light that represent the end of the meteor could happen anywhere above you. link to learning seeing for yourself 14.1 • meteors 479 figure 14.5 perseid meteor shower. this twenty-second exposure shows a meteor during the 2015 perseid meteor shower. (credit: nasa/bill ingalls) the key to observing meteor showers is not to restrict your field of view, but to lie back and scan the sky alertly. try to select a good shower (see the list in table 14.1) and a night when the moon will not be bright at the time you are observing. the moon, street lights, vehicle headlights, bright flashlights, and cell phone and tablet screens will all get in the way of your seeing the faint meteor streaks. you will see more meteors after midnight, when you are on the hemisphere of earth that faces forward—in the direction of earth’s revolution around the sun.
before midnight, you are observing from the “back side” of earth, and the only meteors you see will be those that traveled fast enough to catch up with earth’s orbital motion. when you’ve gotten away from all the lights, give your eyes about 15 minutes to get “dark adapted”—that is, for the pupils of your eyes to open up as much as possible. (this adaptation is the same thing that happens in a dark movie theater. when you first enter, you can’t see a thing, but eventually, as your pupils open wider, you can see pretty clearly by the faint light of the screen—and notice all that spilled popcorn on the floor.) seasoned meteor observers find a hill or open field and make sure to bring warm clothing, a blanket, and a thermos of hot coffee or chocolate with them. (it’s also nice to take along someone with whom you enjoy sitting in the dark.) don’t expect to see fireworks or a laser show: meteor showers are subtle phenomena, best approached with a patience that reflects the fact that some of the dust you are watching burn up may first have been gathered into its parent comet more than 4.5 billion years ago, as the solar system was just forming.
480 14 • cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page498_img1.jpeg] 14.2 meteorites: stones from heaven learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: any fragment of interplanetary debris that survives its fiery plunge through earth’s atmosphere is called a meteorite. meteorites fall only very rarely in any one locality, but over the entire earth thousands fall each year. some meteorites are loners, but many are fragments from the breakup in the atmosphere of a single larger object. these rocks from the sky carry a remarkable record of the formation and early history of the solar system. extraterrestrial origin of meteorites occasional meteorites have been found throughout history, but their extraterrestrial origin was not accepted by scientists until the beginning of the nineteenth century. before that, these strange stones were either ignored or considered to have a supernatural origin. the falls of the earliest recovered meteorites are lost in the fog of mythology. a number of religious texts speak of stones from heaven, which sometimes arrived at opportune moments to smite the enemies of the authors of those texts.
at least one sacred meteorite has apparently survived in the form of the ka’aba, the holy black stone in mecca that is revered by islam as a relic from the time of the patriarchs—although understandably, no chip from this sacred stone has been subject to detailed chemical analysis. the modern scientific history of the meteorites begins in the late eighteenth century, when a few scientists suggested that some strange-looking stones had such peculiar composition and structure that they were probably not of terrestrial origin. the idea that indeed “stones fall from the sky” was generally accepted only after a scientific team led by french physicist jean-baptiste biot investigated a well-observed fall in 1803. meteorites sometimes fall in groups or showers. such a fall occurs when a single larger object breaks up during its violent passage through the atmosphere. it is important to remember that such a shower of meteorites has nothing to do with a meteor shower. no meteorites have ever been recovered in association with meteor showers. whatever the ultimate source of the meteorites, they do not appear to come from the comets or their associated particle streams. meteorite falls and finds meteorites are found in two ways.