there are about 27 grams of dark matter, and the energy equivalent (remember einstein’s famous e = mc2) of about 68 grams of dark energy. dark matter, and (as we will see) even more so dark energy, are dramatic demonstrations of what we have tried to emphasize throughout this book: science is always a “progress report,” and we often encounter areas where we have more questions than answers. let’s next put together all these clues to trace the life history of galaxies and large-scale structure in the universe. what follows is the current consensus, but research in this field is moving rapidly, and some of these ideas will probably be modified as new observations are made. 28.5 the formation and evolution of galaxies and structure in the universe learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: as with most branches of natural science, astronomers and cosmologists always want to know the answer to the question, “how did it get that way?” what made galaxies and galaxy clusters, superclusters, voids, and filaments look the way they do?
the existence of such large filaments of galaxies and voids is an interesting puzzle because we have evidence (to be discussed in the big bang) that the universe was extremely smooth even a few hundred thousand years after forming. the challenge for theoreticians is to understand how a nearly featureless universe changed into the complex and lumpy one that we see today. armed with our observations and current understanding of galaxy evolution over cosmic time, dark matter, and large-scale structure, we are now prepared to try to answer that question on some of the largest possible scales in the universe. as we will see, the short answer to how the universe got this way is “dark matter + gravity + time.” how galaxies form and grow we’ve already seen that galaxies were more numerous, but smaller, bluer, and clumpier, in the distant past than they are today, and that galaxy mergers play a significant role in their evolution. at the same time, we have observed quasars and galaxies that emitted their light when the universe was less than a billion years old—so we know that large condensations of matter had begun to form at least that early.
we also saw in active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes that many quasars are found in the centers of elliptical galaxies. this means that some of the first large concentrations of matter must have evolved into the elliptical galaxies that we see in today’s universe. it seems likely that the supermassive black holes in the centers of galaxies and the spherical distribution of ordinary matter around them formed at the same time and through related physical processes. dramatic confirmation of that picture arrived only in the last decade, when astronomers discovered a curious empirical relationship: as we saw in active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes, the more massive a galaxy is, the more massive its central black hole is. somehow, the black hole and the galaxy “know” enough about each other to match their growth rates. there have been two main types of galaxy formation models to explain all those observations. the first asserts that massive elliptical galaxies formed in a single, rapid collapse of gas and dark matter, during which virtually all the gas was turned quickly into stars. afterward the galaxies changed only slowly as the stars evolved. this is what astronomers call a “top-down” scenario.
summarize the main theories attempting to explain how individual galaxies formed explain how tiny “seeds” of dark matter in the early universe grew by gravitational attraction over billions of years into the largest structures observed in the universe: galaxy clusters and superclusters, filaments, and voids 990 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org the second model suggests that today’s giant ellipticals were formed mostly through mergers of smaller galaxies that had already converted at least some of their gas into stars—a “bottom-up” scenario. in other words, astronomers have debated whether giant ellipticals formed most of their stars in the large galaxy that we see today or in separate small galaxies that subsequently merged. since we see some luminous quasars from when the universe was less than a billion years old, it is likely that at least some giant ellipticals began their evolution very early through the collapse of a single cloud. however, the best evidence also seems to show that mature giant elliptical galaxies like the ones we see nearby were rare before the universe was about 6 billion years old and that they are much more common today than they were when the universe was young.