in the preceding two chapters, we followed the life story of stars, from the process of birth to the brink of death. now we are ready to explore the ways that stars end their lives. sooner or later, each star exhausts its store of nuclear energy. without a source of internal pressure to balance the weight of the overlying layers, every star eventually gives way to the inexorable pull of gravity and collapses under its own weight. following the rough distinction made in the last chapter, we will discuss the end-of-life evolution of stars of lower and higher mass separately. what determines the outcome—bang or whimper—is the mass of the star when it is ready to die, not the mass it was born with. as we noted in the last chapter, stars can lose a significant amount of mass in their middle and old age. the death of stars 23 [image: astronomy_openstax_page795_img1.jpeg] 23.1 the death of low-mass stars learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: let’s begin with those stars whose final mass just before death is less than about 1.4 times the mass of the sun (msun).
(we will explain why this mass is the crucial dividing line in a moment.) note that most stars in the universe fall into this category. the number of stars decreases as mass increases; really massive stars are rare (see the stars: a celestial census). this is similar to the music business where only a few musicians ever become superstars. furthermore, many stars with an initial mass much greater than 1.4 msun will be reduced to that level by the time they die. for example, we now know that stars that start out with masses of at least 8.0 msun (and possibly as much as 10 msun) manage to lose enough mass during their lives to fit into this category (an accomplishment anyone who has ever attempted to lose weight would surely envy). a star in crisis in the last chapter, we left the life story of a star with a mass like the sun’s just after it had climbed up to the red-giant region of the h–r diagram for a second time and had shed some of its outer layers to form a planetary nebula.
recall that during this time, the core of the star was undergoing an “energy crisis.” earlier in its life, during a brief stable period, helium in the core had gotten hot enough to fuse into carbon (and oxygen). but after this helium was exhausted, the star’s core had once more found itself without a source of pressure to balance gravity and so had begun to contract. this collapse is the final event in the life of the core. because the star’s mass is relatively low, it cannot push its core temperature high enough to begin another round of fusion (in the same way larger-mass stars can). the core continues to shrink until it reaches a density equal to nearly a million times the density of water! that is 200,000 times greater than the average density of earth. at this extreme density, a new and different way for matter to behave kicks in and helps the star achieve a final state of equilibrium. in the process, what remains of the star becomes one of the strange white dwarfs that we met in the stars: a celestial census. degenerate stars because white dwarfs are far denser than any substance on earth, the matter inside them behaves in a very unusual way—unlike anything we know from everyday experience.
at this high density, gravity is incredibly strong and tries to shrink the star still further, but all the electrons resist being pushed closer together and set up a powerful pressure inside the core. this pressure is the result of the fundamental rules that govern the behavior of electrons (the quantum physics you were introduced to in the sun: a nuclear powerhouse). according to these rules (known to physicists as the pauli exclusion principle), which have been verified in studies of atoms in the laboratory, no two electrons can be in the same place at the same time doing the same thing. we specify the place of an electron by its position in space, and we specify what it is doing by its motion and the way it is spinning. the temperature in the interior of a star is always so high that the atoms are stripped of virtually all their electrons. for most of a star’s life, the density of matter is also relatively low, and the electrons in the star are moving rapidly. this means that no two of them will be in the same place moving in exactly the same way at the same time. but this all changes when a star exhausts its store of nuclear energy and begins its final collapse.