(credit top: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/esa; credit bottom: modification of work by esa and the planck collaboration) theoretical calculations show that the sizes of the hot and cold spots in the cmb depend on the geometry of the universe and hence on its total density. (it’s not at all obvious that it should do so, and it takes some pretty fancy calculations—way beyond the level of our text—to make the connection, but having such a dependence is very useful.) the total density we are discussing here includes both the amount of mass in the universe and the mass equivalent of the dark energy. that is, we must add together mass and energy: ordinary matter, dark matter, and the dark energy that is speeding up the expansion. to see why this works, remember (from the chapter on black holes and curved spacetime) that with his general theory of relativity, einstein showed that matter can curve space and that the amount of curvature depends on the amount of matter present. therefore, the total amount of matter in the universe (including dark matter and the equivalent matter contribution by dark energy), determines the overall geometry of space.
just like the geometry of space around a black hole has a curvature to it, so the entire universe may have a curvature. let’s take a look at the possibilities (figure 29.19). if the density of matter is higher than the critical density, the universe will eventually collapse. in such a closed universe, two initially parallel rays of light will eventually meet. this kind of geometry is referred to as spherical geometry. if the density of matter is less than critical, the universe will expand forever. two initially parallel rays of light will diverge, and this is referred to as hyperbolic geometry. in a critical-density universe, two parallel light rays never meet, and the expansion comes to a halt only at some time infinitely far in the future. we refer to this as a flat universe, and the kind of euclidean geometry you learned in high school applies in this type of universe. figure 29.19 picturing space curvature for the entire universe. the density of matter and energy determines the overall geometry of space. if the density of the universe is greater than the critical density, then the universe will ultimately collapse and space is said to be closed like the surface of a sphere.
if the density exactly equals the critical density, then space is flat like a sheet of paper; the universe will expand forever, with the rate of expansion coming to a halt infinitely far in the future. if the density is less than critical, then the expansion will continue forever and space is said to be open and negatively curved like the surface of a saddle (where more space than you expect opens up as you move farther away). note that the red lines in each diagram show what happens in each kind of space—they are initially parallel but follow different paths depending on the curvature of space. remember that these drawings are trying to show how space for the entire universe is “warped”—this can’t be seen locally in the small amount of space that we humans occupy. if the density of the universe is equal to the critical density, then the hot and cold spots in the cmb should typically be about a degree in size. if the density is greater than critical, then the typical sizes will be larger than one degree. if the universe has a density less than critical, then the structures will appear smaller. in figure 29.20, you can see the differences easily.
wmap and planck observations of the cmb confirmed earlier experiments that we do indeed live in a flat, critical-density universe. 1032 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1050_img1.jpeg] figure 29.20 comparison of cmb observations with possible models of the universe. cosmological simulations predict that if our universe has critical density, then the cmb images will be dominated by hot and cold spots of around one degree in size (bottom center). if, on the other hand, the density is higher than critical (and the universe will ultimately collapse), then the images’ hot and cold spots will appear larger than one degree (bottom left). if the density of the universe is less than critical (and the expansion will continue forever), then the structures will appear smaller (bottom right). as the measurements show, the universe is at critical density. the measurements shown were made by a balloon-borne instrument called boomerang (balloon observations of millimetric extragalactic radiation and geophysics), which was flown in antarctica. subsequent satellite observations by wmap and planck confirm the boomerang result.