if we can define what is required for life to emerge and thrive, then we can define the zone around stars that is most likely the home for habitable planets. what is a habitable zone? a habitable zone is defined as the region around a star within which it is suitable for life as we know it to evolve. the only planet on which we know that life has evolved is earth. the only life that we are familiar with is the life on the planet earth. so our perception of the requirements for life is defined by this one situation: earth. on earth, it appears that life requires liquid water, many different elements (atoms) and a large supply of carbon (or hydrocarbons). on earth we have abundant liquid water, carbon and other elements. there are many places in the universe with abundant carbon and other elements, but liquid water is only found in regions around a star where it is warmer than the temperature at which water freezes and also cooler than the temperature at which water boils. these limits can be calculated if you know the temperature of the star (see equation 13).
astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 235 figure 274: the sun's habitable zone diagram by evengreenerfish the sun’s habitable zone for the sun, the habitable zone extends from roughly venus’ orbit, includes mars, and to the inner parts of the asteroid belt (past ceres’ orbit). other habitable zones in the solar system recently, scientists believe that there may be additional habitable zones within the solar system. if the requirements for life to develop exist, and the conditions are adequate, then it is possible for life to develop and evolve. titan. although too cold for liquid water to exist, saturn’s moon titan has liquid hydrocarbons on its surface. evolution would move very slowly at the chilly temperatures, but with the plentiful hydrocarbons it is possible that the complex molecules needed to life could exist. europa and ganymede. it is believed that some of jupiter’s moons, such as europa and ganymede, may have subsurface liquid salt-water oceans. too far from the sun to be in its habitable zone, gravitational energy from jupiter could provide the energy necessary to form an ideal environment in which life could evolve. other forms of life.
it is always difficult for people to imagine possible alternatives to what we see around us. when scientists search for places to find life, they focus on places similar to earth. they search around stars that are similar to the sun. they search for life similar to life found on the earth. but, it is possible that life may take many different forms. these forms may be so strange and different from life we see on earth that it is difficult for us to recognize them. even on earth, we find life where we would not expect it: deep in the earth’s crust, deep in the oceans where no light can reach, and even in hot springs where the water is so hot that most forms of life would perish immediately. as we learn more and discover more, we are forced to change our thinking. this is a great example of how scientific theories evolve.