the groups are: ananke (17 moons), carme (18 moons), and pasiphae (14 moons). [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page186_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page186_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 187 the typical roche limit is 2.4 times the radius of the planet figure 199: different forces planetary rings usually lie within the roche limit component 69 – the roche limit there is a distance from a planet within which the tidal forces are so strong that a moon will be pulled apart. on average, for large gas planets, the roche limit is equal to 2.4 times the radius of the planet. the actual value will vary slightly depending on the density of the planet and the density of the moon. the 2.4 value is based on the assumptions that the moon and the planet are the same density. most of the rings around the gas giant planets lie within the roche limit. the reason this is a problem for a moon is that the force on one side of the moon is very different from the other side.
based on kepler’s laws, we know the velocity on the near side (v1 in figure 199) will be greater than the velocity on the far side (v2 in figure 199). these two different velocities create a force that is trying to tear apart the moon. if the moon is within the roche limit, the force will be too strong for the moon to survive. the change in the forces increases as the size of the moon increases. this means that some small moons can survive within the limit and will act as shepherd moons. shepherd moons keep the rings clean. as particles move out of the ring, the gravity from the shepherd moons either forces the particle back into the ring, or ejects it from the vicinity. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page187_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 188 figure 200: jupiter's rings jupiter’s rings are not visible from earth. component 70 – jupiter’s ring jupiter has a ring. it is not observable from earth and was first discovered by the voyager 1 spacecraft fly-by. jupiter has four faint rings mostly composed of dust. the innermost ring is a torus of very fine dust called the halo ring.
the next ring is the main ring and then there are two outer gossamer rings (see figure 200). the rings are aligned with jupiter’s equator. the spaces between the rings are the home of small moons. these are called shepherd moons and keep the particles in the rings in place. between the main ring and the inner gossamer ring are the moons adrastea and metis. between the gossamer rings is the moon almathea, and at the outer edge of the outer gossamer ring is the moon thebe.