out in the suburban regions of the milky way galaxy where we live (see the milky way galaxy), stars and star systems are much too far apart for other stars to provide “food” to a hungry black hole. after all, material must approach very close to the event horizon before the gravity is any different from that of the star before it became the black hole. but, as we will see, the central regions of galaxies are quite different from their outer parts. here, stars and raw material can be quite crowded together, and they can interact much more frequently with each other. therefore, black holes in the centers of galaxies may have a much better opportunity to find mass close enough to their event horizons to pull in. black holes are not particular about what they “eat”: they are happy (e.g., lmc) and constellations (e.g., cygnus), while other letters refer to the satellite that discovered the candidate—a for ariel, g for ginga, and so on. the notations in parentheses are those used by astronomers who study binary star system or novae. 24.6 • evidence for black holes 849 to consume other stars, asteroids, gas, dust, and even other black holes.
(if two black holes merge, you just get a black hole with more mass and a larger event horizon.) as a result, black holes in crowded regions can grow, eventually swallowing thousands or even millions of times the mass of the sun. ground-based observations have provided compelling evidence that there is a black hole in the center of our own galaxy with a mass of about 4 million times the mass of the sun (we’ll discuss this further in the chapter on the milky way galaxy). observations with the hubble space telescope have shown dramatic evidence for the existence of black holes in the centers of many other galaxies. these black holes can contain more than a billion solar masses. the feeding frenzy of such supermassive black holes may be responsible for some of the most energetic phenomena in the universe (see active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes). and evidence from more recent x-ray observations is also starting to indicate the existence of “middle-weight” black holes, whose masses are dozens to thousands of times the mass of the sun. the crowded inner regions of the globular clusters we described in stars from adolescence to old age may be just the right breeding grounds for such intermediate-mass black holes.
over the past decades, many observations, especially with the hubble space telescope and with x-ray satellites, have been made that can be explained only if black holes really do exist. furthermore, the observational tests of einstein’s general theory of relativity have convinced even the most skeptical scientists that his picture of warped or curved spacetime is indeed our best description of the effects of gravity near these black holes. 24.7 gravitational wave astronomy learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: another part of einstein’s ideas about gravity can be tested as a way of checking the theory that underlies black holes. according to general relativity, the geometry of spacetime depends on where matter is located. any rearrangement of matter—say, two stars being pulled toward each other or two black holes colliding—creates a disturbance in spacetime. this disturbance is called a gravitational wave, and relativity predicts that it should spread outward at the speed of light. the big problem with trying to study such waves is that they are tremendously weaker than electromagnetic waves and correspondingly difficult to detect. proof from a pulsar we’ve had indirect evidence for some time that gravitational waves exist.
in 1974, astronomers joseph taylor and russell hulse discovered a pulsar (with the designation psr1913+16) orbiting another neutron star. pulled by the powerful gravity of its companion, the pulsar is moving at about one-tenth the speed of light in its orbit. according to general relativity, this system of stellar corpses should be radiating energy in the form of gravitational waves at a high enough rate to cause the pulsar and its companion to spiral closer together. if this is correct, then the orbital period should decrease (according to kepler’s third law) by one ten-millionth of a second per orbit. continuing observations showed that the period is decreasing by precisely this amount. such a loss of energy in the system can be due only to the radiation of gravitational waves, thus confirming their existence. taylor and hulse shared the 1993 nobel prize in physics for this work. direct observations: the first although such an indirect proof convinced physicists that gravitational waves exist, it is even more satisfying to detect the waves directly. what we need are phenomena that are powerful enough to produce gravitational waves with amplitudes large enough that we can measure them.