(credit: modification of work by nasa, esa, zolt levay(stsci)) another guest star, now known as sn 1054, was clearly recorded in chinese records in july 1054. the remnant of that star is one of the most famous and best-studied objects in the sky, called the crab nebula (figure 23.14). it is a marvelously complex object, which has been key to understanding the death of massive stars. when its explosion was first seen, we estimate that it was about as bright as the planet jupiter: nowhere near as dazzling as the 1006 event but still quite dramatic to anyone who kept track of objects in the sky. another fainter supernova was seen in 1181. the next supernova became visible in november 1572 and, being brighter than the planet venus, was quickly spotted by a number of observers, including the young tycho brahe (see orbits and gravity). his careful measurements of the star over a year and a half showed that it was not a comet or something in earth’s atmosphere since it did not move relative to the stars.
he correctly deduced that it must be a phenomenon belonging to the realm of the stars, not of the solar system. the remnant of tycho’s supernova (as it is now called) can still be detected in many different bands of the electromagnetic spectrum. not to be outdone, johannes kepler, tycho brahe’s scientific heir, found his own supernova in 1604, now known as kepler’s supernova (figure 23.8). fainter than tycho’s, it nevertheless remained visible for about a year. kepler wrote a book about his observations that was read by many with an interest in the heavens, including galileo. no supernova has been spotted in our galaxy for the past 300 years. since the explosion of a visible supernova is a chance event, there is no way to say when the next one might occur. around the world, dozens of professional and amateur astronomers keep a sharp lookout for “new” stars that appear overnight, hoping to be the first to spot the next guest star in our sky and make a little history themselves. at their maximum brightness, the most luminous supernovae have about 10 billion times the luminosity of the sun.
for a brief time, a supernova may outshine the entire galaxy in which it appears. after maximum brightness, the star’s light fades and disappears from telescopic visibility within a few months or years. at the time of their outbursts, supernovae eject material at typical velocities of 10,000 kilometers per second (and speeds twice that have been observed). a speed of 20,000 kilometers per second corresponds to about 45 million miles per hour, truly an indication of great cosmic violence. supernovae are classified according to the appearance of their spectra, but in this chapter, we will focus on the two main causes of supernovae. type ia supernovae are ignited when a lot of material is dumped on degenerate white dwarfs (figure 23.10); these supernovae will be discussed later in this chapter. for now, we 23.3 • supernova observations 791 [image: astronomy_openstax_page809_img1.jpeg] will continue our story about the death of massive stars and focus on type ii supernovae, which are produced when the core of a massive star collapses. figure 23.10 supernova 2014j.
this image of supernova 2014j, located in messier 82 (m82), which is also known as the cigar galaxy, was taken by the hubble space telescope and is superposed on a mosaic image of the galaxy also taken with hubble. the supernova event is indicated by the box and the inset. this explosion was produced by a type ia supernova, which is theorized to be triggered in binary systems consisting of a white dwarf and another star—and could be a second white dwarf, a star like our sun, or a giant star. this type of supernova will be discussed later in this chapter. at a distance of approximately 11.5 million light-years from earth, this is the closest supernova of type ia discovered in the past few decades. in the image, you can see reddish plumes of hydrogen coming from the central region of the galaxy, where a considerable number of young stars are being born. (credit: modification of work by nasa, esa, a. goobar (stockholm university), and the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura)) supernova 1987a our most detailed information about what happens when a type ii supernova occurs comes from an event that was observed in 1987.