just look at the first three stars to have their parallaxes measured: 61 cygni, alpha centauri, and vega. each of these names comes from a different tradition of designating stars. astronomy basics 19.2 • surveying the stars 645 the brightest stars have names that derive from the ancients. some are from the greek, such as sirius, which means “the scorched one”—a reference to its brilliance. a few are from latin, but many of the best- known names are from arabic because, as discussed in observing the sky: the birth of astronomy, much of greek and roman astronomy was “rediscovered” in europe after the dark ages by means of arabic translations. vega, for example, means “swooping eagle,” and betelgeuse (pronounced “beetle-juice”) means “right hand of the central one.” in 1603, german astronomer johann bayer (1572–1625) introduced a more systematic approach to naming stars. for each constellation, he assigned a greek letter to the brightest stars, roughly in order of brightness.
in the constellation of orion, for example, betelgeuse is the brightest star, so it got the first letter in the greek alphabet—alpha—and is known as alpha orionis. (“orionis” is the possessive form of orion, so alpha orionis means “the first of orion.”) a star called rigel, being the second brightest in that constellation, is called beta orionis (figure 19.7). since there are 24 letters in the greek alphabet, this system allows the labeling of 24 stars in each constellation, but constellations have many more stars than that. figure 19.7 objects in orion. (a) this image shows the brightest objects in or near the star pattern of orion, the hunter (of greek mythology), in the constellation of orion. (b) note the greek letters of bayer’s system in this diagram of the orion constellation. the objects denoted m42, m43, and m78 are not stars but nebulae—clouds of gas and dust; these numbers come from a list of “fuzzy objects” made by charles messier in 1781.
(credit a: modification of work by matthew spinelli; credit b: modification of work by eso, iau and sky & telescope) in 1725, the english astronomer royal john flamsteed introduced yet another system, in which the brighter stars eventually got a number in each constellation in order of their location in the sky or, more precisely, their right ascension. (the system of sky coordinates that includes right ascension was discussed in earth, moon, and sky.) in this system, betelgeuse is called 58 orionis and 61 cygni is the 61st star in the constellation of cygnus, the swan. it gets worse. as astronomers began to understand more and more about stars, they drew up a series of specialized star catalogs, and fans of those catalogs began calling stars by their catalog numbers. if you look at appendix i—our list of the nearest stars (many of which are much too faint to get an ancient name, 646 19 • celestial distances access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page664_img1.jpeg] bayer letter, or flamsteed number)—you will see references to some of these catalogs.
an example is a set of stars labeled with a bd number, for “bonner durchmusterung.” this was a mammoth catalog of over 324,000 stars in a series of zones in the sky, organized at the bonn observatory in the 1850s and 1860s. keep in mind that this catalog was made before photography or computers came into use, so the position of each star had to be measured (at least twice) by eye, a daunting undertaking. there is also a completely different system for keeping track of stars whose luminosity varies, and another for stars that brighten explosively at unpredictable times. astronomers have gotten used to the many different star-naming systems, but students often find them bewildering and wish astronomers would settle on one. don’t hold your breath: in astronomy, as in many fields of human thought, tradition holds a powerful attraction. still, with high-speed computer databases to aid human memory, names may become less and less necessary. today’s astronomers often refer to stars by their precise locations in the sky rather than by their names or various catalog numbers. the nearest stars no known star (other than the sun) is within 1 light-year or even 1 parsec of earth.