watch this star size comparison video (https://openstax.org/l/30starsizecomp) for a striking visual that highlights the size of stars versus planets and the range of sizes among stars. 18.4 the h–r diagram learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: in this chapter and analyzing starlight, we described some of the characteristics by which we might classify stars and how those are measured. these ideas are summarized in table 18.2. we have also given an example of a relationship between two of these characteristics in the mass-luminosity relation. when the characteristics of large numbers of stars were measured at the beginning of the twentieth century, astronomers were able to begin a deeper search for patterns and relationships in these data. measuring the characteristics of stars characteristic technique surface temperature 1. determine the color (very rough). 2. measure the spectrum and get the spectral type. chemical composition determine which lines are present in the spectrum. luminosity measure the apparent brightness and compensate for distance. radial velocity measure the doppler shift in the spectrum.
table 18.2 link to learning identify the physical characteristics of stars that are used to create an h–r diagram, and describe how those characteristics vary among groups of stars discuss the physical properties of most stars found at different locations on the h–r diagram, such as radius, and for main sequence stars, mass 18.4 • the h–r diagram 619 characteristic technique rotation measure the width of spectral lines. mass measure the period and radial velocity curves of spectroscopic binary stars. diameter 1. measure the way a star’s light is blocked by the moon. 2. measure the light curves and doppler shifts for eclipsing binary stars. table 18.2 to help understand what sorts of relationships might be found, let’s look briefly at a range of data about human beings. if you want to understand humans by comparing and contrasting their characteristics—without assuming any previous knowledge of these strange creatures—you could try to determine which characteristics lead you in a fruitful direction. for example, you might plot the heights of a large sample of humans against their weights (which is a measure of their mass). such a plot is shown in figure 18.12 and it has some interesting features.
in the way we have chosen to present our data, height increases upward, whereas weight increases to the left. notice that humans are not randomly distributed in the graph. most points fall along a sequence that goes from the upper left to the lower right. figure 18.12 height versus weight. the plot of the heights and weights of a representative group of human beings. most points lie along a “main sequence” representing most people, but there are a few exceptions. we can conclude from this graph that human height and weight are related. generally speaking, taller human beings weigh more, whereas shorter ones weigh less. this makes sense if you are familiar with the structure of human beings. typically, if we have bigger bones, we have more flesh to fill out our larger frame. it’s not mathematically exact—there is a wide range of variation—but it’s not a bad overall rule. and, of course, there are some dramatic exceptions. you occasionally see a short human who is very overweight and would thus be more to the bottom left of our diagram than the average sequence of people. or you might have a very tall, skinny fashion model with great height but relatively small weight, who would be found near the upper right.
a similar diagram has been found extremely useful for understanding the lives of stars. in 1913, american astronomer henry norris russell plotted the luminosities of stars against their spectral classes (a way of denoting their surface temperatures). this investigation, and a similar independent study in 1911 by danish astronomer ejnar hertzsprung, led to the extremely important discovery that the temperature and luminosity of stars are related (figure 18.13). 620 18 • the stars: a celestial census access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page638_img1.jpeg] figure 18.13 hertzsprung (1873–1967) and russell (1877–1957). (a) ejnar hertzsprung and (b) henry norris russell independently discovered the relationship between the luminosity and surface temperature of stars that is summarized in what is now called the h–r diagram. henry norris russell when henry norris russell graduated from princeton university, his work had been so brilliant that the faculty decided to create a new level of honors degree beyond “summa cum laude” for him.