in 2020, scientists with the borexino experiment were also able to identify neutrinos coming specifically from the cno cycle of nuclear fusion. as discussed toward the end of mass, energy, and the theory of relativity, cno fusion plays a very minor role in the sun, but becomes important in stars that are more massive and hotter than the sun. it’s amazing that a series of experiments that began with enough cleaning fluid to fill a swimming pool brought down the shafts of an old gold mine is now teaching us about the energy source of the sun and the properties of matter! this is a good example of how experiments in astronomy and physics, coupled with the best theoretical models we can devise, continue to lead to fundamental changes in our understanding of nature.
566 16 • the sun: a nuclear powerhouse access for free at openstax.org key terms conduction process by which heat is directly transmitted through a substance when there is a difference of temperature between adjoining regions caused by atomic or molecular collisions convection movement caused within a gas or liquid by the tendency of hotter, and therefore less dense material, to rise and colder, denser material to sink under the influence of gravity, which consequently results in transfer of heat fission breaking up of heavier atomic nuclei into lighter ones fusion building up of heavier atomic nuclei from lighter ones helioseismology study of pulsations or oscillations of the sun in order to determine the characteristics of the solar interior hydrostatic equilibrium balance between the weights of various layers, as in a star or earth’s atmosphere, and the pressures that support them neutrino fundamental particle that has no charge and a mass that is tiny relative to an electron; it rarely interacts with ordinary matter and comes in three different types positron particle with the same mass as an electron, but positively charged proton-proton chain series of thermonuclear reactions by which nuclei of hydrogen are built up into nuclei of helium radiation emission of energy as electromagnetic waves or photons also the transmitted energy itself summary 16.1 sources of sunshine: thermal and gravitational energy the sun produces an enormous amount of energy every second.
since earth and the solar system are roughly 4.5 billion years old, this means that the sun has been producing vast amounts for energy for a very, very long time. neither chemical burning nor gravitational contraction can account for the total amount of energy radiated by the sun during all this time. 16.2 mass, energy, and the theory of relativity solar energy is produced by interactions of particles—that is, protons, neutrons, electrons, positrons, and neutrinos. specifically, the source of the sun’s energy is the fusion of hydrogen to form helium. the series of reactions required to convert hydrogen to helium is called the proton-proton chain. a helium atom is about 0.71% less massive than the four hydrogen atoms that combine to form it, and that lost mass is converted to energy (with the amount of energy given by the formula e = mc2). 16.3 the solar interior: theory even though we cannot see inside the sun, it is possible to calculate what its interior must be like. as input for these calculations, we use what we know about the sun. it is made entirely of hot gas.
apart from some very tiny changes, the sun is neither expanding nor contracting (it is in hydrostatic equilibrium) and puts out energy at a constant rate. fusion of hydrogen occurs in the center of the sun, and the energy generated is carried to the surface by radiation and then convection. a solar model describes the structure of the sun’s interior. specifically, it describes how pressure, temperature, mass, and luminosity depend on the distance from the center of the sun. 16.4 the solar interior: observations studies of solar oscillations (helioseismology) and neutrinos can provide observational data about the sun’s interior. the technique of helioseismology has so far shown that the composition of the interior is much like that of the surface (except in the core, where some of the original hydrogen has been converted into helium), and that the convection zone extends about 30% of the way from the sun’s surface to its center. helioseismology can also detect active regions on the far side of the sun and provide better predictions of 16 • key terms 567 solar storms that may affect earth. neutrinos from the sun call tell us about what is happening in the solar interior.