fulton, las cumbres observatory global telescope network) several other kinds of standard bulbs visible over great distances have also been suggested, including the overall brightness of, for example, giant ellipticals and the brightest member of a galaxy cluster. type ia supernovae, however, have proved to be the most accurate standard bulbs, and they can be seen in more distant galaxies than the other types of calibrators. as we will see in the chapter on the big bang, observations of this type of supernova have profoundly changed our understanding of the evolution of the universe. other measuring techniques another technique for measuring galactic distances makes use of an interesting relationship noticed in the late 1970s by brent tully of the university of hawaii and richard fisher of the national radio astronomy observatory. they discovered that the luminosity of a spiral galaxy is related to its rotational velocity (how fast it spins). why would this be true? the more mass a galaxy has, the faster the objects in its outer regions must orbit. a more massive galaxy has more stars in it and is thus more luminous (ignoring dark matter for a moment).
thinking back to our discussion from the previous section, we can say that if the mass-to-light ratios for various spiral galaxies are pretty similar, then we can estimate the luminosity of a spiral galaxy by measuring its mass, and we can estimate its mass by measuring its rotational velocity. tully and fisher used the 21-cm line of cold hydrogen gas to determine how rapidly material in spiral galaxies is orbiting their centers (you can review our discussion of the 21-cm line in between the stars: gas and dust in space). since 21-cm radiation from stationary atoms comes in a nice narrow line, the width of the 21-cm line produced by a whole rotating galaxy tells us the range of orbital velocities of the galaxy’s hydrogen gas. the broader the line, the faster the gas is orbiting in the galaxy, and the more massive and luminous the galaxy turns out to be. it is somewhat surprising that this technique works, since much of the mass associated with galaxies is dark matter, which does not contribute at all to the luminosity but does affect the rotation speed. there is also no obvious reason why the mass-to-light ratio should be similar for all spiral galaxies.
nevertheless, observations of nearer galaxies (where we have other ways of measuring distance) show that measuring the rotational velocity of a galaxy provides an accurate estimate of its intrinsic luminosity. once we know how luminous the 912 26 • galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page930_img1.jpeg] galaxy really is, we can compare the luminosity to the apparent brightness and use the difference to calculate its distance. while the tully-fisher relation works well, it is limited—we can only use it to determine the distance to a spiral galaxy. there are other methods that can be used to estimate the distance to an elliptical galaxy; however, those methods are beyond the scope of our introductory astronomy course. table 26.2 lists the type of galaxy for which each of the distance techniques is useful, and the range of distances over which the technique can be applied.
some methods for estimating distance to galaxies method galaxy type approximate distance range (millions of light-years) planetary nebulae all 0–70 cepheid variables spiral, irregulars 0–110 tully-fisher relation spiral 0–300 type ia supernovae all 0–11,000 redshifts (hubble’s law) all 300–13,000 table 26.2 26.5 the expanding universe learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: we now come to one of the most important discoveries ever made in astronomy—the fact that the universe is expanding. before we describe how the discovery was made, we should point out that the first steps in the study of galaxies came at a time when the techniques of spectroscopy were also making great strides. astronomers using large telescopes could record the spectrum of a faint star or galaxy on photographic plates, guiding their telescopes so they remained pointed to the same object for many hours and collected more light. the resulting spectra of galaxies contained a wealth of information about the composition of the galaxy and the velocities of these great star systems. slipher’s pioneering observations curiously, the discovery of the expansion of the universe began with the search for martians and other solar systems.