mars’ orbital period (1.88 earth years) squared, or , is , and according to the equation for kepler’s third law, this equals the cube of its semimajor axis, or . so what number must be cubed to give 3.53? the answer is . thus, mars’ semimajor axis in astronomical units must be 1.52 au. in other words, to go around the sun in a little less than two years, mars must be about 50% (half again) as far from the sun as earth is. e x a m p l e 3 . 1 calculating periods imagine an object is traveling around the sun. what would be the orbital period of the object if its orbit has a semimajor axis of 50 au? solution from kepler’s third law, we know that (when we use units of years and au) if the object’s orbit has a semimajor axis of 50 au (a = 50), we can cube 50 and then take the square root of the result to get p: therefore, the orbital period of the object is about 350 years. this would place our hypothetical object beyond the orbit of pluto.
check your learning what would be the orbital period of an asteroid (a rocky chunk between mars and jupiter) with a semimajor axis of 3 au? answer: kepler’s three laws of planetary motion can be summarized as follows: • kepler’s first law: each planet moves around the sun in an orbit that is an ellipse, with the sun at one focus of the ellipse. • kepler’s second law: the straight line joining a planet and the sun sweeps out equal areas in space in equal intervals of time. • kepler’s third law: the square of a planet’s orbital period is directly proportional to the cube of the semimajor axis of its orbit. kepler’s three laws provide a precise geometric description of planetary motion within the framework of the copernican system. with these tools, it was possible to calculate planetary positions with greatly improved 74 3 • orbits and gravity access for free at openstax.org precision. still, kepler’s laws are purely descriptive: they do not help us understand what forces of nature constrain the planets to follow this particular set of rules. that step was left to isaac newton. e x a m p l e 3 .
2 applying kepler’s third law using the orbital periods and semimajor axes for venus and earth that are provided here, calculate and , and verify that they obey kepler’s third law. venus’ orbital period is 0.62 year, and its semimajor axis is 0.72 au. earth’s orbital period is 1.00 year, and its semimajor axis is 1.00 au. solution we can use the equation for kepler’s third law, p2 ∝a3. for venus, and (rounding numbers sometimes causes minor discrepancies like this). the square of the orbital period (0.38) approximates the cube of the semimajor axis (0.37). therefore, venus obeys kepler’s third law. for earth, and . the square of the orbital period (1.00) approximates (in this case, equals) the cube of the semimajor axis (1.00). therefore, earth obeys kepler’s third law. check your learning using the orbital periods and semimajor axes for saturn and jupiter that are provided here, calculate p2 and a3, and verify that they obey kepler’s third law.
saturn’s orbital period is 29.46 years, and its semimajor axis is 9.54 au. jupiter’s orbital period is 11.86 years, and its semimajor axis is 5.20 au. answer: for saturn, and . the square of the orbital period (867.9) approximates the cube of the semimajor axis (868.3). therefore, saturn obeys kepler’s third law. in honor of the scientist who first devised the laws that govern the motions of planets, the team that built the first spacecraft to search for planets orbiting other stars decided to name the probe “kepler.” visit nasa's website about kepler and kepler’s laws (https://openstax.org/l/30nasakepmiss) to learn more about his life and the way his laws are being applied to the motion of planets today.