the second cluster also contains mainly main-sequence stars, along with some red giant stars, and a few neutron stars—but no white dwarf stars. what are the relative ages of the clusters? how did you determine your answer? 27. a supernova remnant was recently discovered and found to be approximately 150 years old. provide possible reasons that this supernova explosion escaped detection. 28. based upon the evolution of stars, place the following elements in order of least to most common in the galaxy: gold, carbon, neon. what aspects of stellar evolution formed the basis for how you ordered the elements? 29. what observations or types of telescopes would you use to distinguish a binary system that includes a main-sequence star and a white dwarf star from one containing a main-sequence star and a neutron star? 30. how would the spectra of a type ii supernova be different from a type ia supernova? hint: consider the characteristics of the objects that are their source. figuring for yourself 31. the ring around sn 1987a (figure 23.12) initially became illuminated when energetic photons from the supernova interacted with the material in the ring.
the radius of the ring is approximately 0.75 light-year from the supernova location. how long after the supernova did the ring become illuminated? 32. what is the acceleration of gravity (g) at the surface of the sun? (see appendix e for the sun’s key characteristics.) how much greater is this than g at the surface of earth? calculate what you would weigh on the surface of the sun. your weight would be your earth weight multiplied by the ratio of the acceleration of gravity on the sun to the acceleration of gravity on earth. (okay, we know that the sun does not have a solid surface to stand on and that you would be vaporized if you were at the sun’s photosphere. humor us for the sake of doing these calculations.) 33. what is the escape velocity from the sun? how much greater is it than the escape velocity from earth? 34. what is the average density of the sun? how does it compare to the average density of earth? 35. say that a particular white dwarf has the mass of the sun but the radius of earth. what is the acceleration of gravity at the surface of the white dwarf? how much greater is this than g at the surface of earth?
what would you weigh at the surface of the white dwarf (again granting us the dubious notion that you could survive there)? 36. what is the escape velocity from the white dwarf in exercise 23.35? how much greater is it than the escape velocity from earth? 23 • exercises 821 37. what is the average density of the white dwarf in exercise 23.35? how does it compare to the average density of earth? 38. now take a neutron star that has twice the mass of the sun but a radius of 10 km. what is the acceleration of gravity at the surface of the neutron star? how much greater is this than g at the surface of earth? what would you weigh at the surface of the neutron star (provided you could somehow not become a puddle of protoplasm)? 39. what is the escape velocity from the neutron star in exercise 23.38? how much greater is it than the escape velocity from earth? 40. what is the average density of the neutron star in exercise 23.38? how does it compare to the average density of earth? 41.
one way to calculate the radius of a star is to use its luminosity and temperature and assume that the star radiates approximately like a blackbody. astronomers have measured the characteristics of central stars of planetary nebulae and have found that a typical central star is 16 times as luminous and 20 times as hot (about 110,000 k) as the sun. find the radius in terms of the sun’s. how does this radius compare with that of a typical white dwarf? 42. according to a model described in the text, a neutron star has a radius of about 10 km. assume that the pulses occur once per rotation. according to einstein’s theory of relatively, nothing can move faster than the speed of light. check to make sure that this pulsar model does not violate relativity. calculate the rotation speed of the crab nebula pulsar at its equator, given its period of 0.033 s. (remember that distance equals velocity × time and that the circumference of a circle is given by 2πr). 43. do the same calculations as in exercise 23.42 but for a pulsar that rotates 1000 times per second. 44.