[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page119_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 120 component 38 – solar system formation a theory of the formation of the solar system needs to explain all of the things that we see in the solar system today. it must also be able to explain all of the new star systems that we discover. what we see today in the solar system individual planets. our solar system has 8 distinct planets. they are spaced out throughout the solar system with the inner planets closer together and the outer planets more widely spaced. planetary rotations. most planets rotate counterclockwise when viewed from above the solar system as defined by earth’s north pole. the theory must explain this as well as why some do not conform. planetary orbits. all planets revolve around the sun in a counterclockwise direction. nearly circular orbits. the orbits of the planets are nearly circular. orbital plane. all of the planets and many of the moons orbit close to the same plane: the ecliptic. differentiation. the solar system is heavily differentiated. we have rocky inner planets and gaseous outer planets. we have a region containing rocky objects called the asteroid belt.
we also have a region of icy objects beyond the orbit of neptune called the kuiper belt. lastly, there is the spherical region of icy objects called the oort cloud. the nebular theory first we need a theory that explains the general formation of the planets and the solar system. the theory widely accepted at this time is called the nebular theory. this theory states that initially there was a nebula of gas and dust, roughly one light-year in diameter. this nebula was disturbed by a shockwave from an outside source. it could have been a collision with another nebula, the formation of a star, or the explosion at the end of a star’s life. this shockwave would cause some of the material to condense. as it condensed it would heat up and its rotation velocity would increase. a spinning sphere will flatten and become a disk. the center would form into a protostar and eventually the sun. the outer regions would form into planets. astronomers can see similar disks that have formed around young stars. conservation of angular momentum means that objects formed from the solar nebula would keep the angular momentum of the original nebula.
this means that they should all rotate and revolve in the astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 121 figure 158: the solar nebula artist’s conception by nasa same direction. in the case of our solar system, this direction is counterclockwise. this would also result in roughly circular orbits for the planets lying in the same orbital plane. the condensation theory small dust particles in the nebula act as condensation sites. their small gravity attracts other particles. as more material is collected, the mass and gravity increase. the process of growing this way is called accretion. the small objects are called planetesimals and eventually some would become protoplanets. as these protoplanets form they begin to attract each other. collisions either result in mergers, creating larger objects, or they cause fragmentation which send out materials that combine with other protoplanets. eventually these sweep out the solar system and create relative voids between the surviving planets. gravitational instability theory there is also a complementary theory that states that the outer planets formed from instabilities in the solar nebula. this gravitational instability theory allows the outer planets to begin forming earlier. this could have occurred in as few as 1000 years.
this would also allow them to attract the hydrogen and helium gas from the surrounding nebula before the [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page121_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 122 figure 159: solar system formation timeline solar winds could blow it away. the major moons of the outer planets would have formed in the same way, as accretion disks around the outer planets. differentiation within the solar system as you move outward from the sun, the temperature decreases and different materials would begin to condense. initially this would be metallic material (near mercury’s orbit) followed by rocky material (near earth’s orbit). farther out water ice would form (beyond jupiter’s orbit), and then ammonia ice. the strength of the solar wind would also decrease as you move farther away from the sun. as the materials in the solar nebula were dispersed or condensed into planets the temperature would drop significantly. giant planet migration theory the giant planets, when they formed, would still be largely embedded in the solar nebula. as they orbited the sun, they would run into materials in the nebula. this would have the effect of slowing down their motion and would cause them to spiral inward to their present orbits.