this interaction happened to only a single nucleus in each person and thus had absolutely no biological effect; it went completely unnoticed by everyone concerned. since the neutrinos come directly from the heart of the supernova, their energies provided a measure of the temperature of the core as the star was exploding. the central temperature was about 200 billion k, a stunning figure to which no earthly analog can bring much meaning. with neutrino telescopes, we are peering into the final moment in the life stories of massive stars and observing conditions beyond all human experience. yet we are also seeing the unmistakable hints of our own origins. the remnant of sn1987a type ii supernova explosion like sn1987a can leave behind two different kinds of collapsed remnants: a neutron star (see evolution of massive stars: an explosive finish) or a black hole (which will be discussed in black holes and curved spacetime.) during the years that followed the discovery of sn1987a, the central region of the explosion has been hidden from our direct observations by a great deal of gas and dust.
but in 2024, an international team of astronomers, led by claes fransson of stockholm university, announced that the james webb space telescope had now enabled them to look through the dust. using infrared light, they observed highly ionized atoms of argon and sulfur in the center of the supernova remnant. the argon atoms had lost five of their 18 electrons, a process that requires a photon with a lot of energy. (we discussed light as a photon in the behavior of light.) they tried to fit their observations with a number of different scenarios for where such high-energy photons could come from, but the only idea that explained all their observations is that there is a newly-born neutron star in the center giving off high-energy x-ray radiation. we will discuss the properties of such neutron stars in the section that follows. astronomers are delighted to be able to observe a newly-born neutron star so early in its life and will be following the story of this “star corpse” for many years to come.
796 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org 23.4 pulsars and the discovery of neutron stars learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: after a type ii supernova explosion fades away, all that is left behind is either a neutron star or something even more strange, a black hole. we will describe the properties of black holes in black holes and curved spacetime, but for now, we want to examine how the neutron stars we discussed earlier might become observable. neutron stars are the densest objects in the universe; the force of gravity at their surface is 1011 times greater than what we experience at earth’s surface. the interior of a neutron star is composed of about 95% neutrons, with a small number of protons and electrons mixed in. in effect, a neutron star is a giant atomic nucleus, with a mass about 1057 times the mass of a proton. its diameter is more like the size of a small town or an asteroid than a star. (table 23.3 compares the properties of neutron stars and white dwarfs.) because it is so small, a neutron star probably strikes you as the object least likely to be observed from thousands of light-years away.
yet neutron stars do manage to signal their presence across vast gulfs of space. properties of a typical white dwarf and a neutron star property white dwarf neutron star mass (sun = 1) 0.6 (always <1.4) always >1.4 and <3 radius 7000 km 10 km density g/cm3 1014 g/cm3 table 23.3 the discovery of neutron stars in 1967, jocelyn bell, a research student at cambridge university, was studying distant radio sources with a special detector that had been designed and built by her advisor antony hewish to find rapid variations in radio signals. in those days, the project computers spewed out reams of paper showing where the telescope had surveyed the sky, and it was the job of hewish’s graduate students to go through it all, searching for interesting phenomena. in september 1967, bell discovered what she called “a bit of scruff”—a strange radio signal unlike anything seen before. what bell had found, in the constellation of vulpecula, was a source of rapid, sharp, intense, and extremely regular pulses of radio radiation. like the regular ticking of a clock, the pulses arrived precisely every 1.33728 seconds.