all this while, the ant is following the shortest path it can, but through no fault of its own (after all, ants can’t fly, so it has to stay on the sheet) this path is curved by the distortion of the sheet itself. in the same way, according to einstein’s theory, light always follows the shortest path through spacetime. but the mass associated with large concentrations of matter distorts spacetime, and the shortest, most direct paths are no longer straight lines, but curves. how large does a mass have to be before we can measure a change in the path followed by light? in 1916, when einstein first proposed his theory, no distortion had been detected at the surface of earth (so earth might have played the role of the grain of sand in our analogy). something with a mass like our sun’s was necessary to detect the effect einstein was describing (we will discuss how this effect was measured using the sun in the next section). the paperweight in our analogy might be a white dwarf or a neutron star. the distortion of spacetime is greater near the surfaces of these compact, massive objects than near the surface of the sun.
and when, to return to the situation described at the beginning of the chapter, a star core with more than three times the mass of the sun collapses forever, the distortions of spacetime very close to it can become truly mind- boggling. 24.3 tests of general relativity learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: what einstein proposed was nothing less than a major revolution in our understanding of space and time. it was a new theory of gravity, in which mass determines the curvature of spacetime and that curvature, in turn, controls how objects move. like all new ideas in science, no matter who advances them, einstein’s theory had to be tested by comparing its predictions against the experimental evidence. this was quite a challenge because the effects of the new theory were apparent only when the mass was quite large.
(for smaller masses, describe unusual motion of mercury around the sun and explain how general relativity explains the observed behavior provide examples of evidence for light rays being bent by massive objects, as predicted by general relativity’s theory about the warping of spacetime 834 24 • black holes and curved spacetime access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page852_img1.jpeg] it required measuring techniques that would not become available until decades later.) when the distorting mass is small, the predictions of general relativity must agree with those resulting from newton’s law of universal gravitation, which, after all, has served us admirably in our technology and in guiding space probes to the other planets. in familiar territory, therefore, the differences between the predictions of the two models are subtle and difficult to detect. nevertheless, einstein was able to demonstrate one proof of his theory that could be found in existing data and to suggest another one that would be tested just a few years later. the motion of mercury of the planets in our solar system, mercury orbits closest to the sun and is thus most affected by the distortion of spacetime produced by the sun’s mass.
einstein wondered if the distortion might produce a noticeable difference in the motion of mercury that was not predicted by newton’s law. it turned out that the difference was subtle, but it was definitely there. most importantly, it had already been measured. mercury has a highly elliptical orbit, so that it is only about two-thirds as far from the sun at perihelion as it is at aphelion. (these terms were defined in the chapter on orbits and gravity.) the gravitational effects (perturbations) of the other planets on mercury produce a calculable advance of mercury’s perihelion. what this means is that each successive perihelion occurs in a slightly different direction as seen from the sun (figure 24.9). figure 24.9 mercury’s wobble. the major axis of the orbit of a planet, such as mercury, rotates in space slightly because of various perturbations. in mercury’s case, the amount of rotation (or orbital precession) is a bit larger than can be accounted for by the gravitational forces exerted by other planets; this difference is precisely explained by the general theory of relativity.