the stars seen near the sun were indeed displaced, and to the accuracy of the measurements, which was about 20%, the shifts were consistent with the predictions of general relativity. more modern experiments with radio waves traveling close to the sun have confirmed that the actual displacements are within 1% of what general relativity predicts. the confirmation of the theory by the eclipse expeditions in 1919 was a triumph that made einstein a world celebrity. 836 24 • black holes and curved spacetime access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page854_img1.jpeg] 24.4 time in general relativity learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: general relativity theory makes various predictions about the behavior of space and time. one of these predictions, put in everyday terms, is that the stronger the gravity, the slower the pace of time. such a statement goes very much counter to our intuitive sense of time as a flow that we all share. time has always seemed the most democratic of concepts: all of us, regardless of wealth or status, appear to move together from the cradle to the grave in the great current of time.
but einstein argued that it only seems this way to us because all humans so far have lived and died in the gravitational environment of earth. we have had no chance to test the idea that the pace of time might depend on the strength of gravity, because we have not experienced radically different gravities. moreover, the differences in the flow of time are extremely small until truly large masses are involved. nevertheless, einstein’s prediction has now been tested, both on earth and in space. the tests of time an ingenious experiment in 1959 used the most accurate atomic clock known to compare time measurements on the ground floor and the top floor of the physics building at harvard university. for a clock, the experimenters used the frequency (the number of cycles per second) of gamma rays emitted by radioactive cobalt. einstein’s theory predicts that such a cobalt clock on the ground floor, being a bit closer to earth’s center of gravity, should run very slightly slower than the same clock on the top floor. this is precisely what the experiments observed. later, atomic clocks were taken up in high-flying aircraft and even on one of the gemini space flights. in each case, the clocks farther from earth ran a bit faster.
while in 1959 it didn’t matter much if the clock at the top of the building ran faster than the clock in the basement, today that effect is highly relevant. every smartphone or device that synchronizes with a gps must correct for this (as we will see in the next section) since the clocks on satellites will run faster than clocks on earth. the effect is more pronounced if the gravity involved is the sun’s and not earth’s. if stronger gravity slows the pace of time, then it will take longer for a light or radio wave that passes very near the edge of the sun to reach earth than we would expect on the basis of newton’s law of gravity. (it takes longer because spacetime is curved in the vicinity of the sun.) the smaller the distance between the ray of light and the edge of the sun at closest approach, the longer will be the delay in the arrival time. in november 1976, when the two viking spacecraft were operating on the surface of mars, the planet went behind the sun as seen from earth (figure 24.11). scientists had preprogrammed viking to send a radio wave toward earth that would go extremely close to the outer regions of the sun.
according to general relativity, there would be a delay because the radio wave would be passing through a region where time ran more slowly. the experiment was able to confirm einstein’s theory to within 0.1%. describe how einsteinian gravity slows clocks and can decrease a light wave’s frequency of oscillation recognize that the gravitational decrease in a light wave’s frequency is compensated by an increase in the light wave’s wavelength—the so-called gravitational redshift—so that the light continues to travel at constant speed 24.4 • time in general relativity 837 figure 24.11 time delays for radio waves near the sun. radio signals from the viking lander on mars were delayed when they passed near the sun, where spacetime is curved relatively strongly. in this picture, spacetime is pictured as a two-dimensional rubber sheet. gravitational redshift what does it mean to say that time runs more slowly? when light emerges from a region of strong gravity where time slows down, the light experiences a change in its frequency and wavelength. to understand what happens, let’s recall that a wave of light is a repeating phenomenon—crest follows crest with great regularity. in this sense, each light wave is a little clock, keeping time with its wave cycle.