combines visible-light and x-ray observations to permit a remarkable 3-d visualization of the supernova remnant (3:02). uncovering the veil nebula: https://esahubble.org/videos/heic0712a/ (https://esahubble.org/videos/ heic0712a/). an introduction to supernovae and their remnants, with a focus on an older remnant in cygnus (6:17). what are pulsars?: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dhdc43n1wme (https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=dhdc43n1wm). dr. michael koop of ohio university introduces and explains pulsars for the beginner (13:20). gamma-ray bursts nasa explains gamma-ray bursts: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sc7qd08ugqw (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sc7qd08ugqw). a concise introduction to different kinds of bursts as of 2024 (3:05). nasa’s fermi and swift telescopes capture revolutionary gamma-ray burst: https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=fqlzpm34chg (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqlzpm34chg).
on observations of a 2021 burst that didn’t fit into the neat categories astronomers have set up (2:21). what caused the brightest explosions in the universe: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bunqhztge5a 818 23 • for further exploration access for free at openstax.org (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bunqhztge5a). a review of gamma-ray bursts by science explainer christian ready and an especially bright burst in 2022 (14:56). collaborative group activities a. someone in your group uses a large telescope to observe an expanding shell of gas. discuss what measurements you could make to determine whether you have discovered a planetary nebula or the remnant of a supernova explosion. b. the star sirius (the brightest star in our northern skies) has a white-dwarf companion. sirius has a mass of about 2 msun and is still on the main sequence, while its companion is already a star corpse. remember that a white dwarf can’t have a mass greater than 1.4 msun. assuming that the two stars formed at the same time, your group should discuss how sirius could have a white-dwarf companion.
hint: was the initial mass of the white-dwarf star larger or smaller than that of sirius? c. discuss with your group what people today would do if a brilliant star suddenly became visible during the daytime? what kind of fear and superstition might result from a supernova that was really bright in our skies? have your group invent some headlines that the tabloid newspapers and the less responsible web news outlets would feature. d. suppose a supernova exploded only 40 light-years from earth. have your group discuss what effects there may be on earth when the radiation reaches us and later when the particles reach us. would there be any way to protect people from the supernova effects? e. when pulsars were discovered, the astronomers involved with the discovery talked about finding “little green men.” if you had been in their shoes, what tests would you have performed to see whether such a pulsating source of radio waves was natural or the result of an alien intelligence? today, several groups around the world are actively searching for possible radio signals from intelligent civilizations. how might you expect such signals to differ from pulsar signals? f.
your little brother, who has not had the benefit of an astronomy course, reads about white dwarfs and neutron stars in a magazine and decides it would be fun to go near them or even try to land on them. is this a good idea for future tourism? have your group make a list of reasons it would not be safe for children (or adults) to go near a white dwarf and a neutron star. g. a lot of astronomers’ time and many instruments have been devoted to figuring out the nature of gamma- ray bursts. does your group share the excitement that astronomers feel about these mysterious high- energy events? what are some reasons that people outside of astronomy might care about learning about gamma-ray bursts? exercises review questions 1. how does a white dwarf differ from a neutron star? how does each form? what keeps each from collapsing under its own weight? 2. describe the evolution of a star with a mass like that of the sun, from the main-sequence phase of its evolution until it becomes a white dwarf. 3. describe the evolution of a massive star (say, 20 times the mass of the sun) up to the point at which it becomes a supernova.