for a long time, scientists thought that the forces of electricity and magnetism were separate, but james clerk maxwell (see the chapter on radiation and spectra) was able to unify these forces—to show that they are aspects of the same phenomenon. in the same way, many scientists (including einstein) have wondered if the four forces we now know could also be unified. physicists have actually developed guts that unify three of the four forces (but not gravity). in these theories, the strong, weak, and electromagnetic forces are not three independent forces but instead are different manifestations or aspects of what is, in fact, a single force. the theories predict that at high enough temperatures, there would be only one force. at lower temperatures (like the ones in the universe today), however, this single force has changed into three different forces (figure 29.27). just as different gases or liquids freeze at different temperatures, we can say that the different forces “froze out” of the unified force at different temperatures. unfortunately, the temperatures at which the three forces acted as one force are so high that they cannot be reached in any laboratory on earth. only the early universe, at times prior to 10–35 second, was hot enough to unify these forces.
figure 29.27 four forces that govern the universe. the behavior of the four forces depends on the temperature of the universe. this diagram (inspired by some grand unified theories) shows that at very early times when the temperature of the universe was very high, all four forces resembled one another and were indistinguishable. as the universe cooled, the forces took on separate and distinctive characteristics. many physicists think that gravity was also unified with the three other forces at still higher temperatures, and scientists have tried to develop a theory that combines all four forces. for example, in string theory, the point- like particles of matter that we have discussed in this book are replaced by one-dimensional objects called strings. in this theory, infinitesimal strings, which have length but not height or width, are the building blocks used to construct all the forms of matter and energy in the universe. these strings exist in 11-dimensional space (not the 4-dimensional spacetime with which we are familiar). the strings vibrate in the various 29.6 • the inflationary universe 1043 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1061_img1.jpeg] dimensions, and depending on how they vibrate, they are seen in our world as matter or gravity or light.
as you can imagine, the mathematics of string theory is very complex, and the theory remains untested by experiments. even the largest particle accelerators on earth do not achieve high enough energy to show whether string theory applies to the real world. string theory is interesting to scientists because it is currently the only approach that seems to have the potential of combining all four forces to produce what physicists have termed the theory of everything.3 theories of the earliest phases of the universe must take both quantum mechanics and gravity into account, but at the simplest level, gravity and quantum mechanics are incompatible. general relativity, our best theory of gravity, says that the motions of objects can be predicted exactly. quantum mechanics says you can only calculate the probability (chance) that an object will do something. string theory is an attempt to resolve this paradox. the mathematics that underpins string theory is elegant and beautiful, but it remains to be seen whether it will make predictions that can be tested by observations in yet-to-be-developed, high-energy accelerators on earth or by observations of the early universe. the earliest period in the history of the universe from time zero to 10–43 second is called the planck time.
the universe was unimaginably hot and dense, and theorists believe that at this time, quantum effects of gravity dominated physical interactions—and, as we have just discussed, we have no tested theory of quantum gravity. inflation is hypothesized to have occurred somewhat later, when the universe was between perhaps 10–35 and 10–33 second old and the temperature was 1027 to 1028 k. this rapid expansion took place when three forces (electromagnetic, strong, and weak) are thought to have been unified, and this is when guts are applicable. after inflation, the universe continued to expand (but more slowly) and to cool. an important milestone was reached when the temperature was down to 1015 k and the universe was 10–10 second old. under these conditions, all four forces were separate and distinct. high-energy particle accelerators can achieve similar conditions, and so theories of the history of the universe from this point on have a sound basis in experiments. as yet, we have no direct evidence of what the conditions were during the inflationary epoch, and the ideas presented here are speculative. researchers are trying to devise some experimental tests.