why would a massive star with its outer layers missing sometimes produce a gamma-ray burst at the same time that it explodes as a supernova? the explanation astronomers have in mind for the extra energy is the collapse of the star’s core to form a spinning, magnetic black hole or neutron star. because the star corpse is both magnetic and spinning rapidly, its sudden collapse is complex and can produce swirling jets of particles and powerful beams of radiation—just like in a quasar or active galactic nucleus (objects you will learn about 23.6 • the mystery of the gamma-ray bursts 811 [image: astronomy_openstax_page829_img1.jpeg] active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes), but on a much faster timescale. a small amount of the infalling mass is ejected in a narrow beam, moving at speeds close to that of light. collisions among the particles in the beam can produce intense bursts of energy that we see as a gamma-ray burst. within a few minutes, the expanding blast from the fireball plows into the interstellar matter in the dying star’s neighborhood. this matter might have been ejected from the star itself at earlier stages in its evolution.
alternatively, it could be the gas out of which the massive star and its neighbors formed. as the high-speed particles from the blast are slowed, they transfer their energy to the surrounding matter in the form of a shock wave. that shocked material emits radiation at longer wavelengths. this accounts for the afterglow of x-rays, visible light, and radio waves—the glow comes at longer and longer wavelengths as the blast continues to lose energy. short-duration gamma-ray bursts: colliding stellar corpses what about the shorter gamma-ray bursts? the gamma-ray emission from these events lasts less than 2 seconds, and in some cases may last only milliseconds—an amazingly short time. such a timescale is difficult to achieve if they are produced in the same way as long-duration gamma-ray bursts, since the collapse of the stellar interior onto the black hole should take at least a few seconds. astronomers looked fruitlessly for afterglows from short-duration gamma-ray bursts found by bepposax and other satellites. evidently, the afterglows fade away too quickly. fast-responding visible-light telescopes like rotse were not helpful either: no matter how fast these telescopes responded, the bursts were not bright enough at visible wavelengths to be detected by these small telescopes.
once again, it took a new satellite to clear up the mystery. in this case, it was the swift gamma-ray burst satellite, launched in 2004 by a collaboration between nasa and the italian and uk space agencies (figure 23.23). the design of swift is similar to that of bepposax. however, swift is much more agile and flexible: after a gamma-ray burst occurs, the x-ray and uv telescopes can be repointed automatically within a few minutes (rather than a few hours). thus, astronomers can observe the afterglow much earlier, when it is expected to be much brighter. furthermore, the x-ray telescope is far more sensitive and can provide positions that are 30 times more precise than those provided by bepposax, allowing bursts to be identified even without visible- light or radio observations. 812 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org figure 23.23 artist’s illustration of swift. the us/uk/italian spacecraft swift contains on-board gamma-ray, x-ray, and ultraviolet detectors, and has the ability to automatically reorient itself to a gamma-ray burst detected by the gamma-ray instrument.
since its launch in 2005, swift has detected and observed over a thousand bursts, including dozens of short-duration bursts. (credit: nasa, spectrum astro) on may 9, 2005, swift detected a flash of gamma rays lasting 0.13 seconds in duration, originating from the constellation coma berenices. remarkably, the galaxy at the x-ray position looked completely different from any galaxy in which a long-duration burst had been seen to occur. the afterglow originated from the halo of a giant elliptical galaxy 2.7 billion light-years away, with no signs of any young, massive stars in its spectrum. furthermore, no supernova was ever detected after the burst, despite extensive searching. what could produce a burst less than a second long, originating from a region with no star formation? the leading model involves the merger of two compact stellar corpses: two neutron stars, or perhaps a neutron star and a black hole. since many stars come in binary or multiple systems, it’s possible to have systems where two such star corpses orbit one another.