(credit a: modification of work by esa; credit b: modification of work by tom herbst, max-planck-institut fuer astronomie, heidelberg, doug hamilton, max- 13.4 • the origin and fate of comets and related objects 465 [image: astronomy_openstax_page483_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page483_img2.jpeg] planck-institut fuer kernphysik, heidelberg, hermann boehnhardt, universitaets-sternewarte, muenchen, and jose luis ortiz moreno, instituto de astrofisica de andalucia, granada) after this event, dark clouds of debris settled into the stratosphere of jupiter, producing long-lived “bruises” (each still larger than earth) that could be easily seen through even small telescopes (figure 13.31). millions of people all over the world peered at jupiter through telescopes or followed the event via television or online. another, smaller, impact feature was seen on jupiter in summer 2009 (and six more since), indicating that the 1994 events were by no means unique.
seeing these large, impact explosions on jupiter helps us to appreciate the disaster that would happen to our planet if we were hit by a comet or asteroid. figure 13.31 impact dust cloud on jupiter. these features result from the impact of comet shoemaker-levy 9 with jupiter, seen with the hubble space telescope 105 minutes after the impact that produced the dark rings (the compact back dot came from another fragment). the inner edge of the diffuse, outer ring is about the same size as earth. later, the winds on jupiter blended these features into a broad spot that remained visible for more than a month. (credit: modification of work by h. hammel, mit, and nasa/esa) for comets that do not meet so dramatic an end, measurements of the amount of gas and dust in their atmospheres permit us to estimate the total losses during one orbit. typical loss rates are up to a million tons per day from an active comet near the sun, adding up to some tens of millions of tons per orbit. at that rate, a typical comet will be gone after a few thousand orbits. this will probably be the fate of comet halley in the long run.
earlier we mentioned that comets can also escape the solar system. in 2019, astronomers discovered comet 2i/borisov, which came from a planetary system other than ours. it is only the second interstellar object we have found, and the first that is rich in volatile materials such as water and carbon compounds. the presence of an atmosphere allowed its composition to be studied. borisov contains much more carbon monoxide than normal solar system comets, which tells us that it was probably formed in a cooler location, perhaps around a red dwarf star. watch this 4-minute nasa retrospective on the collision of comet shoemaker-levy 9 with jupiter history channel video (https://openstax.org/l/30shoemaker) to learn more.