when the solar wind reaches earth, as we saw, it causes earth’s magnetosphere to contract and then expand after the solar wind passes by. these changes can cause (usually mild) electromagnetic disturbances on earth. more serious are solar flares, which shower the upper atmosphere of earth with x-rays, energetic particles, and intense ultraviolet radiation. the x-rays and ultraviolet radiation can ionize atoms in earth’s upper atmosphere, and the freed electrons can build up a charge on the surface of a spacecraft. when this static charge discharges, it can damage the electronics in the spacecraft—just as you can receive a shock when you walk across a carpet in your stocking feet in a dry climate and then touch a light switch or some other metal object. link to learning 530 15 • the sun: a garden-variety star access for free at openstax.org most disruptive are coronal mass ejections. a cme is an erupting bubble of tens of millions of tons of gas blown away from the sun into space. when this bubble reaches earth a few days after leaving the sun, it heats the ionosphere, which expands and reaches farther into space. as a consequence, friction between the atmosphere and spacecraft increases, dragging satellites to lower altitudes.
at the time of a particularly strong flare and cme in march 1989, the system responsible for tracking some 19,000 objects orbiting earth temporarily lost track of 11,000 of them because their orbits were changed by the expansion of earth’s atmosphere. during solar maximum, a number of satellites are brought to such a low altitude that they are destroyed by friction with the atmosphere. both the hubble space telescope and the international space station (figure 15.24) require reboosts to higher altitude so that they can remain in orbit. figure 15.24 international space station. the international space station is seen above earth, as photographed in 2010 by the departing crew of the space shuttle atlantis. (credit: nasa) in may of 2024, heightened levels of activity on the sun led to several flares and cmes that generated significant geomagnetic storms on earth. as a result, auroras (sometimes also called “northern lights” in the northern hemisphere and “southern lights” in the southern hemisphere) were seen at much lower latitudes than usual. check out the summary and wonderful aurora images (https://openstax.org/l/30mayaurora) to learn more.
solar storm damage on earth when a cme reaches earth, it distorts earth’s magnetic field. since a changing magnetic field induces electrical current, the cme accelerates electrons, sometimes to very high speeds. these “killer electrons” can penetrate deep into satellites, sometimes destroying their electronics and permanently disabling operation. this has happened with some communications satellites. disturbances in earth’s magnetic field can cause disruptions in communications, especially cell phone and wireless systems. in fact, disruptions can be expected to occur several times a year during solar maximum. changes in earth’s magnetic field due to cmes can also cause surges in power lines large enough to burn out transformers and cause major power outages. for example, in 1989, parts of montreal and quebec province in link to learning 15.4 • space weather 531 [image: astronomy_openstax_page549_img1.jpeg] canada were without power for up to 9 hours as a result of a major solar storm. electrical outages due to cmes are more likely to occur in north america than in europe because north america is closer to earth’s magnetic pole, where the currents induced by cmes are strongest.
besides changing the orbits of satellites, cmes can also distort the signals sent by them. these effects can be large enough to reduce the accuracy of gps-derived positions so that they cannot meet the limits required for airplane systems, which must know their positions to within 160 feet. such disruptions caused by cmes have occasionally forced the federal aviation administration to restrict flights for minutes or, in a few cases, even days. solar storms also expose astronauts, passengers in high-flying airplanes, and even people on the surface of earth to increased amounts of radiation. astronauts, for example, are limited in the total amount of radiation to which they can be exposed during their careers. a single ill-timed solar outburst could end an astronaut’s career. this problem becomes increasingly serious as astronauts spend more time in space. for example, the typical daily dose of radiation aboard the russian mir space station was equivalent to about eight chest x-rays. one of the major challenges in planning the human exploration of mars is devising a way to protect astronauts from high-energy solar radiation. advance warning of solar storms would help us minimize their disruptive effects. power networks could be run at less than their full capacity so that they could absorb the effects of power surges.