in both cases, the disturbance travels rapidly outward from the point of origin and can use its energy to disturb other things farther away. (for example, in water, the expanding ripples moving away from our frog could disturb the peace of a dragonfly resting on a leaf in the same pool.) in the case of electromagnetic waves, the radiation generated by a transmitting antenna full of charged particles and moving electrons at your local radio station can, sometime later, disturb a group of electrons in your car radio antenna and bring you the news and weather while you are driving to class or work in the morning. the waves generated by charged particles differ from water waves in some profound ways, however. water waves require water to travel in. the sound waves we hear, to give another example, are pressure disturbances that require air to travel though. but electromagnetic waves do not require water or air: the fields generate each other and so can move through a vacuum (such as outer space). this was such a disturbing idea to nineteenth-century scientists that they actually made up a substance to fill all of space—one for which there was not a single shred of evidence—just so light waves could have something to travel through: they called it the aether.
today, we know that there is no aether and that electromagnetic waves have no trouble at all moving through empty space (as all the starlight visible on a clear night must surely be doing). the other difference is that all electromagnetic waves move at the same speed in empty space (the speed of light—approximately 300,000 kilometers per second, or 300,000,000 meters per second, which can also be written as ), which turns out to be the fastest possible speed in the universe. no matter where electromagnetic waves are generated from and no matter what other properties they have, when they are 144 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page162_img1.jpeg] moving (and not interacting with matter), they move at the speed of light. yet you know from everyday experience that there are different kinds of light. for example, we perceive that light waves differ from one another in a property we call color. let’s see how we can denote the differences among the whole broad family of electromagnetic waves. the nice thing about a wave is that it is a repeating phenomenon.
whether it is the up-and-down motion of a water wave or the changing electric and magnetic fields in a wave of light, the pattern of disturbance repeats in a cyclical way. thus, any wave motion can be characterized by a series of crests and troughs (figure 5.4). moving from one crest through a trough to the next crest completes one cycle. the horizontal length covered by one cycle is called the wavelength. ocean waves provide an analogy: the wavelength is the distance that separates successive wave crests. figure 5.4 characterizing waves. electromagnetic radiation has wave-like characteristics. the wavelength (λ) is the distance between crests, the frequency (f) is the number of cycles per second, and the speed (c) is the distance the wave covers during a specified period of time (e.g., kilometers per second). for visible light, our eyes perceive different wavelengths as different colors: red, for example, is the longest visible wavelength, and violet is the shortest. the main colors of visible light from longest to shortest wavelength can be remembered using the mnemonic roy g biv—for red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet.
other invisible forms of electromagnetic radiation have different wavelengths, as we will see in the next section. we can also characterize different waves by their frequency, the number of wave cycles that pass by per second. if you count 10 crests moving by each second, for example, then the frequency is 10 cycles per second (cps). in honor of heinrich hertz, the physicist who—inspired by maxwell’s work—discovered radio waves, a cps is also called a hertz (hz). take a look at your radio, for example, and you will see the channel assigned to each radio station is characterized by its frequency, usually in units of khz (kilohertz, or thousands of hertz) or mhz (megahertz, or millions of hertz). wavelength (λ) and frequency (f) are related because all electromagnetic waves travel at the same speed. to see how this works, imagine a parade in which everyone is forced by prevailing traffic conditions to move at exactly the same speed. you stand on a corner and watch the waves of marchers come by. first you see row after row of miniature ponies.