the greek gods did not take kindly to being compared to mere mortals, and athena turned medusa into a gorgon: a hideous, evil creature with writhing snakes for hair and a face that turned anyone who looked at it into stone. perseus was given the task of slaying this demon, which seemed like a pretty sure way to get him out of the way forever. but because perseus had a god for a father, some of the other gods gave him tools for the job, including athena’s reflective shield and the winged sandals of hermes (mercury in the roman story). by flying over her and looking only at her reflection, perseus was able to cut off medusa’s head without ever looking at her directly. taking her head (which, conveniently, could still turn onlookers to stone even without being attached to her body) with him, perseus continued on to other adventures. he next came to a rocky seashore, where boasting had gotten another family into serious trouble with the gods.
queen cassiopeia had dared to compare her own beauty to that of the nereids, sea nymphs who were daughters of poseidon (neptune in roman mythology), the god of the sea. poseidon was so offended that he created a sea-monster named cetus to devastate the kingdom. king cepheus, cassiopeia’s beleaguered husband, consulted the oracle, who told him that he must sacrifice his beautiful daughter andromeda to the monster. when perseus came along and found andromeda chained to a rock near the sea, awaiting her fate, he rescued her by turning the monster to stone. (scholars of mythology actually trace the essence of this story back to far-older legends from ancient mesopotamia, in which the god-hero marduk vanquishes a monster named tiamat.
symbolically, a hero like perseus or marduk is usually associated with the sun, the monster with the power of night, and the beautiful maiden with the fragile beauty of dawn, which the sun releases after its nightly struggle with darkness.) many of the characters in these greek legends can be found as constellations in the sky, not necessarily resembling their namesakes but serving as reminders of the story. for example, vain cassiopeia is sentenced to be very close to the celestial pole, rotating perpetually around the sky and hanging upside down every winter. the ancients imagined andromeda still chained to her rock (it is much easier to see the chain of stars than to recognize the beautiful maiden in this star grouping). perseus is next to her with the making connections 3 fans of batman comic books and movies will recognize that this name was given to an archvillain in the series. 616 18 • the stars: a celestial census access for free at openstax.org head of medusa swinging from his belt. algol represents this gorgon head and has long been associated with evil and bad fortune in such tales.
some commentators have speculated that the star’s change in brightness (which can be observed with the unaided eye) may have contributed to its unpleasant reputation, with the ancients regarding such a change as a sort of evil “wink.” diameters of eclipsing binary stars we now turn back to the main thread of our story to discuss how all this can be used to measure the sizes of stars. the technique involves making a light curve of an eclipsing binary, a graph that plots how the brightness changes with time. let us consider a hypothetical binary system in which the stars are very different in size, like those illustrated in figure 18.11. to make life easy, we will assume that the orbit is viewed exactly edge-on. even though we cannot see the two stars separately in such a system, the light curve can tell us what is happening. when the smaller star just starts to pass behind the larger star (a point we call first contact), the brightness begins to drop. the eclipse becomes total (the smaller star is completely hidden) at the point called second contact. at the end of the total eclipse (third contact), the smaller star begins to emerge. when the smaller star has reached last contact, the eclipse is completely over.