geoffrey dean, an australian researcher, reversed the astrological readings of 22 subjects, substituting phrases that were the opposite of what the horoscope actually said. yet, his subjects said that the resulting readings applied to them just as often (95%) as the people to whom the original phrases were given. making connections 2.3 • astrology and astronomy 53 for more on astrology and science from an astronomer’s point of view, read this article (https://openstax.org/l/30astrosociety) that shines light on the topic through an accessible q&a. 2.4 the birth of modern astronomy learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: astronomy made no major advances in strife-torn medieval europe. the birth and expansion of islam after the seventh century led to a flowering of arabic and jewish cultures that preserved, translated, and added to many of the astronomical ideas of the greeks.
many of the names of the brightest stars, for example, are today taken from the arabic, as are such astronomical terms as “zenith.” as european culture began to emerge from its long, dark age, trading with arab countries led to a rediscovery of ancient texts such as almagest and to a reawakening of interest in astronomical questions. this time of rebirth (in french, “renaissance”) in astronomy was embodied in the work of copernicus (figure 2.16). figure 2.16 nicolaus copernicus (1473–1543). copernicus was a cleric and scientist who played a leading role in the emergence of modern science. although he could not prove that earth revolves about the sun, he presented such compelling arguments for this idea that he turned the tide of cosmological thought and laid the foundations upon which galileo and kepler so effectively built in the following century. copernicus one of the most important events of the renaissance was the displacement of earth from the center of the universe, an intellectual revolution initiated by a polish cleric in the sixteenth century. nicolaus copernicus was born in torun, a mercantile town along the vistula river.
his training was in law and medicine, but his main interests were astronomy and mathematics. his great contribution to science was a critical reappraisal of the existing theories of planetary motion and the development of a new sun-centered, or heliocentric, model of the solar system. copernicus concluded that earth is a planet and that all the planets circle the sun. only the moon orbits earth (figure 2.17). link to learning explain how copernicus developed the heliocentric model of the solar system explain the copernican model of planetary motion and describe evidence or arguments in favor of it describe galileo’s discoveries concerning the study of motion and forces explain how galileo’s discoveries tilted the balance of evidence in favor of the copernican model 54 2 • observing the sky: the birth of astronomy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page72_img1.jpeg] figure 2.17 copernicus’ system. copernicus developed a heliocentric plan of the solar system. this system was published in the first edition of de revolutionibus orbium coelestium. notice the word sol for “sun” in the middle.
(credit: nicolai copernici) copernicus described his ideas in detail in his book de revolutionibus orbium coelestium (on the revolution of celestial orbs), published in 1543, the year of his death. by this time, the old ptolemaic system needed significant adjustments to predict the positions of the planets correctly. copernicus wanted to develop an improved theory from which to calculate planetary positions, but in doing so, he was himself not free of all traditional prejudices. he began with several assumptions that were common in his time, such as the idea that the motions of the heavenly bodies must be made up of combinations of uniform circular motions. but he did not assume (as most people did) that earth had to be in the center of the universe, and he presented a defense of the heliocentric system that was elegant and persuasive. his ideas, although not widely accepted until more than a century after his death, were much discussed among scholars and, ultimately, had a profound influence on the course of world history. one of the objections raised to the heliocentric theory was that if earth were moving, we would all sense or feel this motion.