this group of stars is only 1 to 2 million years old. the pressure of the hot, ionized gas surrounding these stars compresses the material in the nearby edge of the molecular cloud and initiates the gravitational collapse that will lead to the formation of more stars. the basic idea of triggered star formation is this: when a massive star is formed, it emits a large amount of ultraviolet radiation and ejects high-speed gas in the form of a stellar wind. this injection of energy heats the gas around the stars and causes it to expand. when massive stars exhaust their supply of fuel, they explode, and the energy of the explosion also heats the gas. the hot gases pile into the surrounding cold molecular cloud, compressing the material in it and increasing its density. if this increase in density is large enough, gravity will overcome pressure, and stars will begin to form in the compressed gas. such a chain reaction—where the brightest and hottest stars of one area become the cause of star formation “next door”—seems to have occurred not only in orion but also in many other molecular clouds. there are many molecular clouds that form only (or mainly) low-mass stars.
because low-mass stars do not have strong winds and do not die by exploding, triggered star formation cannot occur in these clouds. there are also stars that form in relative isolation in small cores. therefore, not all star formation is originally triggered by the death of massive stars. however, there are likely to be other possible triggers, such as spiral density waves and other processes we do not yet understand. the birth of a star although regions such as orion give us clues about how star formation begins, the subsequent stages are still shrouded in mystery (and a lot of dust). there is an enormous difference between the density of a molecular cloud core and the density of the youngest stars that can be detected. direct observations of this collapse to higher density are nearly impossible for two reasons. first, the dust-shrouded interiors of molecular clouds where stellar births take place cannot be observed with visible light. second, the timescale for the initial collapse—thousands of years—is very short, astronomically speaking. since each star spends such a tiny fraction of its life in this stage, relatively few stars are going through the collapse process at any given time.
nevertheless, through a combination of theoretical calculations and the limited observations available, astronomers have pieced together a picture of what the earliest stages of stellar evolution are likely to be. the first step in the process of creating stars is the formation of dense cores within a clump of gas and dust (figure 21.8(a)). it is generally thought that all the material for the star comes from the core, the larger structure surrounding the forming star. eventually, the gravitational force of the infalling gas becomes strong enough to overwhelm the pressure exerted by the cold material that forms the dense cores. the material then undergoes a rapid collapse, and the density of the core increases greatly as a result. during the time a dense core is contracting to become a true star, but before the fusion of protons to produce helium begins, we call the object a protostar. 21.1 • star formation 705 [image: astronomy_openstax_page723_img1.jpeg] figure 21.8 formation of a star. (a) dense cores form within a molecular cloud. (b) a protostar with a surrounding disk of material forms at the center of a dense core, accumulating additional material from the molecular cloud through gravitational attraction.
(c) a stellar wind breaks out but is confined by the disk to flow out along the two poles of the star. (d) eventually, this wind sweeps away the cloud material and halts the accumulation of additional material, and a newly formed star, surrounded by a disk, becomes observable. these sketches are not drawn to the same scale. the diameter of a typical envelope that is supplying gas to the newly forming star is about 5000 au. the typical diameter of the disk is about 100 au or slightly larger than the diameter of the orbit of pluto. the natural turbulence inside a clump tends to give any portion of it some initial spinning motion (even if it is very slow). as a result, each collapsing core is expected to spin. according to the law of conservation of angular momentum (discussed in the chapter on orbits and gravity), a rotating body spins more rapidly as it decreases in size. in other words, if the object can turn its material around a smaller circle, it can move that material more quickly—like a figure skater spinning more rapidly as she brings her arms in tight to her body. this is exactly what happens when a core contracts to form a protostar: as it shrinks, its rate of spin increases.