the sun rotates more rapidly at its equator, where the rotation period is about 25 days, than near the poles, where the period 536 15 • key terms access for free at openstax.org is slightly longer than 36 days. the number of visible sunspots varies according to a sunspot cycle that averages 11 years in length. spots frequently occur in pairs. during a given 11-year cycle, all leading spots in the northern hemisphere have the same magnetic polarity, whereas all leading sports in the southern hemisphere have the opposite polarity. in the subsequent 11-year cycle, the polarity reverses. for this reason, the magnetic activity cycle of the sun is understood to last for 22 years. this activity cycle is connected with the behavior of the sun’s magnetic field, but the exact mechanism is not yet understood. 15.3 solar activity above the photosphere signs of more intense solar activity, an increase in the number of sunspots, as well as prominences, plages, solar flares, and coronal mass ejections, all tend to occur in active regions—that is, in places on the sun with the same latitude and longitude but at different heights in the atmosphere.
active regions vary with the solar cycle, just like sunspots do. 15.4 space weather space weather is the effect of solar activity on our own planet, both in our magnetosphere and on earth’s surface. coronal holes allow more of the sun’s material to flow out into space. solar flares and coronal mass ejections can cause auroras, disrupt communications, damage satellites, and cause power outages on earth. for further exploration articles berman, b. “how solar storms could shut down earth.” astronomy (september 2013): 22. review of how events on the sun can hurt our civilization. bobra, m. “is the sun changing.” sky & telescope (january 2018): 18. why have the last few activity cycles differed from expectations. evans, b. “a fresh look at our home star.” astronomy (august 2020): 18. good introduction to the sun and how the european solar orbiter probe will observe it. james, c. “solar forecast: storm ahead.” sky & telescope (july 2007): 24.
nice review on the effects of the sun’s outbursts on earth and how we monitor “space weather.” macdougal, d. “charles greeley abbot and the epic hunt for the solar constant.” sky & telescope (july 2022): 28. how astronomers measured the energy output of the sun. odenwald, s. “bringing the sun to light.” astronomy (november 2024): 14. nice review of our current understanding of the sun. rimmer, a. “the sun: now in high-def.” sky & telescope (november 2023): 14. about the remarkably detailed images from the inouye solar telescope. schrijver, c. and title, a. “today’s science of the sun.” sky & telescope (february 2001): 34; and (march 2001): 34. excellent reviews of research about the solar atmosphere. stuart, c. “how well do we know the sun.” sky & telescope (april 2021): 12. different techniques imply somewhat different abundances of elements in the sun. wadhwa, m.
“order from chaos: genesis samples the solar wind.” astronomy (october 2013): 54. about a satellite that returned samples of the sun’s wind. whitney, charles “cecilia payne-gaposchkin: an astronomer's astrono¬mer.” sky & telescope (march 1980): 212. on the life and work of the astronomer who figured out what the sun and the stars are made of. young, m. “to touch the sun.” sky & telescope (november 2020): 20. on the parker solar probe mission. 15 • for further exploration 537 websites cecilia payne and the composition of the stars: https://www.amnh.org/learn-teach/curriculum-collections/ cosmic-horizons-book/cecilia-payne-profile (https://www.amnh.org/learn-teach/curriculum-collections/cosmic- horizons-book/cecilia-payne-profile). a nice essay by steve soter and neil degrasse tyson.