768 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org key terms association a loose group of young stars whose spectral types, motions, and positions in the sky indicate a common origin globular cluster one of about 150 large, spherical star clusters (each with hundreds of thousands of stars) that form a spherical halo around the center of our galaxy helium flash a nearly explosive ignition of helium in the triple-alpha process in the dense core of a red giant star main-sequence turnoff location in the h–r diagram where stars begin to leave the main sequence nucleosynthesis the building up of heavy elements from lighter ones by nuclear fusion open cluster a comparatively loose cluster of stars, containing from a few dozen to a few thousand members, located in the spiral arms or disk of our galaxy; sometimes referred to as a galactic cluster planetary nebula a shell of gas ejected by and expanding away from an extremely hot low-mass star that is nearing the end of its life (the nebulae glow because of the ultra-violet energy of the central star) triple-alpha process a nuclear reaction by which three helium nuclei are built up (fused) into one carbon nucleus zero-age main sequence a line denoting the main sequence on the h–r diagram for a system of stars that have completed their contraction from interstellar matter and are now deriving all their energy from nuclear reactions, but whose chemical composition has not yet been altered substantially by nuclear reactions summary 22.1 evolution from the main sequence to red giants when stars first begin to fuse hydrogen to helium, they lie on the zero-age main sequence.
the amount of time a star spends in the main-sequence stage depends on its mass. more massive stars complete each stage of evolution more quickly than lower-mass stars. the fusion of hydrogen to form helium changes the interior composition of a star, which in turn results in changes in its temperature, luminosity, and radius. eventually, as stars age, they evolve away from the main sequence to become red giants or supergiants. the core of a red giant is contracting, but the outer layers are expanding as a result of hydrogen fusion in a shell outside the core. the star gets larger, redder, and more luminous as it expands and cools. 22.2 star clusters star clusters provide one of the best tests of our calculations of what happens as stars age. the stars in a given cluster were formed at about the same time and have the same composition, so they differ mainly in mass, and thus, in their life stage. there are three types of star clusters: globular, open, and associations. globular clusters have diameters of 50–450 light-years, contain hundreds of thousands of stars, and are distributed in a halo around the galaxy.
open clusters typically contain hundreds of stars, are located in the plane of the galaxy, and have diameters less than 30 light-years. associations are found in regions of gas and dust and contain extremely young stars. 22.3 checking out the theory the h–r diagram of stars in a cluster changes systematically as the cluster grows older. the most massive stars evolve most rapidly. in the youngest clusters and associations, highly luminous blue stars are on the main sequence; the stars with the lowest masses lie to the right of the main sequence and are still contracting toward it. with passing time, stars of progressively lower masses evolve away from (or turn off) the main sequence. in globular clusters, which are all at least 11 billion years old, there are no luminous blue stars at all. astronomers can use the turnoff point from the main sequence to determine the age of a cluster. 22 • key terms 769 22.4 further evolution of stars after stars become red giants, their cores eventually become hot enough to produce energy by fusing helium to form carbon (and sometimes a bit of oxygen.) the fusion of three helium nuclei produces carbon through the triple-alpha process.