this outward pressure is called the electron degeneracy pressure. all of the electrons have been forced into their lowest possible energy state. once the temperature has reached the necessary limit of 100 million k, the helium in the core will begin to fuse using the triple alpha process to make carbon. with the onset of helium fusion, with the core in this degenerate state, the additional temperature demands do not increase the pressure. the helium core becomes unstable. the temperature rises quickly and the pressure remains fairly constant and this causes the fusion rate to also increase rapidly. at the end of this stage, the helium fusion goes out of control and there is a massive helium fusion event called the helium flash. over a timespan of a few hours, helium fuses at an incredible rate and heats the core to the point where the thermal pressure surpasses the electron degeneracy pressure and the core expands. the star is now able to return to hydrostatic equilibrium. the star shrinks and its luminosity drops. the surface temperature increases and the star moves on to the next stage, the horizontal branch. this is the red line in figure 309. during this branch there are very strong stellar winds and approximately a quarter of the stars mass may be lost through those winds.
stage 9: the horizontal branch the star’s position on the horizontal branch depends on the remaining mass of the star. the more massive the star is at this point, the cooler the surface temperature and the larger the astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 270 at this point, mars is inside the sun diameter of the star. helium fusion happens rapidly, and as the fuel supply declines, the core again begins to collapse and the star moves into the asymptotic giant branch. stage 10: the asymptotic giant branch more pressure leads to higher temperatures and more rapid fusion. the star then follows the purple line in figure 309, the asymptotic giant branch. during this phase the helium supply continues to diminish and the core continues to collapse. the size of the star increases and the luminosity increases as the surface temperature decreases a little. the core collects more and more carbon. at the end of this stage, you have a non-burning core of carbon surrounded by a shell of burning helium, which in turn is surrounded by a burning shell of hydrogen. outside of these layers, the non-burning hydrogen has puffed out to an even larger red giant star.
a sun-like star is not massive enough to have the gravity necessary to increase the pressure and temperature in the carbon core high enough to ignite carbon fusion. the core will contract to the point where electron degeneracy limits the contraction. but before new fusion can ignite, the existing fusion drops to a level where the outward pressure can’t sustain the size of the star. the core temperature is up to 300 million k. some carbon fusion will occur along the outer edge of the carbon core, but in general the engine in the core of the star is shutting down. stage 11: the planetary nebula at the end of the purple line in figure 309, the next stage begins. the star has expanded out to the diameter of mar’s orbit. at this point the fusion in the outer layers of the core continues at a very high rate, the outer shell of hydrogen continues to expand, but the outward pressure from fusion has diminished. at this point the layers of the core become unstable. the helium shell experiences large and rapid changes in helium fusion causing explosions in the layer. these create much energy that moves into the outer shell of hydrogen, which then expand rapidly. this happens repeatedly and each expansion is larger and more violent than the previous one.
this culminates in one large pulse that effectively blows off the outer layers of the star into space leaving the central carbon core. the outer layers expand outward as a planetary nebula. this material is expanding away from the core at a speed of tens of kilometers per second and expands out beyond the orbit of neptune. the carbon core is a carbon white dwarf which will cool until it reaches the temperature of the surrounding space and becomes a black dwarf. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 271 table 32: a low mass star's life stage name 1 dust cloud 2 fragmentation 3 condensation 4 protostar 5 star 6 main sequence 7 white dwarf 8 black dwarf component 112 – the lives of small stars low-mass stars, those smaller than the sun will have different life paths than sun-like stars. each stage of a low-mass stars life is longer than the sun-like stars. small star childhood the time required for a sun-like star to evolve to the main sequence stage is measured in tens of millions of years. for a small red dwarf star, this childhood takes billions of years.