frequency of occurrence of meteorite classes class falls (%) finds (%) antarctic (%) primitive stones 88 51 85 differentiated stones 8 2 12 irons 3 42 2 stony-irons 1 5 1 table 14.2 ages and compositions of meteorites it was not until the ages of meteorites were measured and their compositions analyzed in detail that scientists appreciated their true significance. the meteorites include the oldest and most primitive materials available for direct study in the laboratory. the ages of stony meteorites can be determined from the careful 484 14 • cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page502_img1.jpeg] measurement of radioactive isotopes and their decay products. almost all meteorites have radioactive ages between 4.50 and 4.56 billion years, as old as any ages we have measured in the solar system. the few younger exceptions are igneous rocks that have been ejected from cratering events on the moon or mars (and have made their way to earth).
the average age for the most primitive meteorites, calculated using the most accurate values now available for radioactive half-lives, is 4.56 billion years, with an uncertainty of less than 0.01 billion years. this value (which we round off to 4.5 billion years in this book) is taken to represent the age of the solar system—the time since the first solids condensed and began to form into larger bodies. the traditional classification of meteorites into irons, stones, and stony-irons is easy to use because it is obvious from inspection which category a meteorite falls into (although it may be much more difficult to distinguish a meteoritic stone from a terrestrial rock). more scientifically significant, however, is the distinction between primitive and differentiated meteorites. the differentiated meteorites are fragments of larger parent bodies that were molten before they broke up, allowing the denser materials (such as metals) to sink to their centers. like many rocks on earth, they have been subject to a degree of chemical reshuffling, with the different materials sorted according to density.
differentiated meteorites include the irons, which come from the metal cores of their parent bodies; stony-irons, which probably originate in regions between a metal core and a stony mantle; and some stones that are composed of mantle or crust material from their differentiated parent bodies. the most primitive meteorites for information on the earliest history of the solar system, we turn to the primitive meteorites—those made of materials that have not been subject to great heat or pressure since their formation. we can look at the spectrum of sunlight reflected from asteroids and compare their compositions with those of primitive meteorites. such analysis indicates that their parent bodies are almost certainly asteroids. since asteroids are believed to be fragments left over from the formation process of the solar system, it makes sense that they should be the parent bodies of the primitive meteorites. the great majority of the meteorites that reach earth are primitive stones. many of them are composed of light-colored gray silicates with some metallic grains mixed in, but there is also an important group of darker stones called carbonaceous meteorites. as their name suggests, these meteorites contain carbon, but we also find various complex organic molecules in them—chemicals based on carbon, which on earth are the chemical building blocks of life.
in addition, some of them contain chemically bound water, and many are depleted in metallic iron. the carbonaceous (or c-type) asteroids are concentrated in the outer part of the asteroid belt. among the most useful of these meteorites have been the allende meteorite that fell in mexico (see figure 14.9), the murchison meteorite that fell in australia (both in 1969), and the tagish lake meteorite that landed in a winter snowdrift on tagish lake, canada, in 2000. (the fragile bits of dark material from the tagish lake meteorite were readily visible against the white snow, although at first they were mistaken for wolf droppings.) the murchison meteorite (figure 14.10) is known for the variety of organic chemicals it has yielded. most of the carbon compounds in carbonaceous meteorites are complex, tarlike substances that defy exact analysis. murchison also contains 16 amino acids (the building blocks of proteins), 11 of which are rare on earth. the most remarkable thing about these organic molecules is that they include equal numbers with right-handed and left-handed molecular symmetry.