describe how energy makes its way from the nuclear core of the sun to the atmosphere. include the name of each layer and how energy moves through the layer. 3. make a sketch of the sun’s atmosphere showing the locations of the photosphere, chromosphere, and corona. what is the approximate temperature of each of these regions? 4. why do sunspots look dark? 5. which aspects of the sun’s activity cycle have a period of about 11 years? which vary during intervals of about 22 years? 6. summarize the evidence indicating that over several hundreds of years or more there have been variations in the level of the solar activity. 7. what is the zeeman effect and what does it tell us about the sun? 8. explain how the theory of the sun’s dynamo results in an average 22-year solar activity cycle. include the location and mechanism for the dynamo. 9. compare and contrast the four different types of solar activity above the photosphere. 10. what are the two sources of particles coming from the sun that cause space weather? how are they different? 11. how does activity on the sun affect human technology on earth and in the rest of the solar system? 12.
how does activity on the sun affect natural phenomena on earth? thought questions 13. table 15.1 indicates that the density of the sun is 1.41 g/cm3. since other materials, such as ice, have similar densities, how do you know that the sun is not made of ice? 14. starting from the core of the sun and going outward, the temperature decreases. yet, above the photosphere, the temperature increases. how can this be? 15. since the rotation period of the sun can be determined by observing the apparent motions of sunspots, a correction must be made for the orbital motion of earth. explain what the correction is and how it arises. making some sketches may help answer this question. 540 15 • exercises access for free at openstax.org 16. suppose an (extremely hypothetical) elongated sunspot forms that extends from a latitude of 30° to a latitude of 40° along a fixed line of longitude on the sun. how will the appearance of that sunspot change as the sun rotates? (figure 15.17 should help you figure this out.) 17.
the text explains that plages are found near sunspots, but figure 15.18 shows that they appear even in areas without sunspots. what might be the explanation for this? 18. why would a flare be observed in visible light, when they are so much brighter in x-ray and ultraviolet light? 19. how can the prominences, which are so big and ‘float’ in the corona, stay gravitationally attached to the sun while flares can escape? 20. if you were concerned about space weather and wanted to avoid it, where would be the safest place on earth for you to live? 21. suppose you live in northern canada and an extremely strong flare is reported on the sun. what precautions might you take? what might be a positive result? figuring for yourself 22. the edge of the sun doesn’t have to be absolutely sharp in order to look that way to us. it just has to go from being transparent to being completely opaque in a distance that is smaller than your eye can resolve. remember from astronomical instruments that the ability to resolve detail depends on the size of the telescope’s aperture.
the pupil of your eye is very small relative to the size of a telescope and therefore is very limited in the amount of detail you can see. in fact, your eye cannot see details that are smaller than 1/30 of the diameter of the sun (about 1 arcminute). nearly all the light from the sun emerges from a layer that is only about 400 km thick. what fraction is this of the diameter of the sun? how does this compare with the ability of the human eye to resolve detail? suppose we could see light emerging directly from a layer that was 300,000 km thick. would the sun appear to have a sharp edge? 23. show that the statement that 92% of the sun’s atoms are hydrogen is consistent with the statement that 73% of the sun’s mass is made up of hydrogen, as found in table 15.2. (hint: make the simplifying assumption, which is nearly correct, that the sun is made up entirely of hydrogen and helium.) 24.