he gained further expertise at the harvard college observatory under edward pickering, and at the berlin observatory. shortly thereafter he joined the faculty at the university of chicago, where, in 1897 he designed and then managed the 40-inch yerkes refractor and its associated laboratories. (figure 505 is from several years later, during a visit by albert einstein, fifth from the right.) but hale was always thinking about bigger telescopes, and, recognizing that refractors were a dead end in that respect, he began to design large reflecting telescopes. to that end, his father commissioned a 60-inch glass mirror blank as a gift to his son. when hale received funding for an observatory from the newly established carnegie institution in 1904, hale and his team began grinding the mirror and searching for a suitable site. in december, 1908, the hale 60- inch telescope on mt. wilson, near los angeles, saw “first light.” while this instrument was still under construction, hale began designing an even larger telescope with a 100-inch mirror, financed by a grant from hardware magnate john d. hooker, and additional funding from andrew carnegie personally.
the hooker telescope saw first light in november, 1917. in the 1930’s, hale went on to design the 200-inch reflector that was eventually installed on mt. palomar in late 1948, and which was posthumously named after him. thus, george ellery hale designed what were in his day the four largest telescopes of their type in the world. as it turned out, the 60-inch reflector on mt. wilson was not large enough to change cosmology. but with the 100-inch everything did change. using leavitt’s law for cepheid variables, edwin hubble was finally able to resolve individual cepheids in the andromeda galaxy. the distance worked out to nearly a million [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page466_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 467 light-years, well beyond the confines of the milky way. the universe had just become a lot bigger.
edwin hubble (1889-1953), the son of an insurance executive, graduated from the university of chicago in 1910 and then became a rhodes scholar, where he studied law at oxford university for three years at the request of his father. when his father died in 1913, hubble decided he didn’t want to be a lawyer and began the process of re-tooling as an astronomer. he did his astronomical “apprenticeship” at the yerkes observatory studying different kinds of nebulae, where he came to the attention of hale, who hired him to help staff the new hooker telescope. the 1923 discovery of extra-galactic cepheids in andromeda was followed with measurements of other cepheids in other nearby galaxies. hubble then turned his attention to the question of why almost all galaxies seem to have their spectra shifted to the red end of the scale. was this due to the doppler shift, indicating that all those galaxies are receding from us? building on the pioneering work done at the lowell observatory in flagstaff, arizona, by vesto melvin slipher, and with spectroscopic data provided by his colleague at mt.
wilson, milton humason, hubble finally concluded that the observed redshifts were directly proportional to the distances of those galaxies. a doubling of the redshift meant a doubling of the distance. the year was 1929. einstein and cosmology albert einstein (1879-1955), was the son of an electrical engineer and early on showed a talent for mathematics and physics. though born in ulm, germany, einstein chose to become a swiss citizen at age 16 to avoid military service (he was a life-long pacifist). he entered the zurich polytechnic, graduating in 1902, only to find that none of his professors would recommend him for a job because of einstein’s habit of cutting classes to work independently. through a friend, he finally got a job at the swiss patent office in bern in 1903 as a patent examiner, third class. easily able to complete his work quickly, he used his spare time at the patent office to pursue theoretical physics (this picture shows einstein at his work desk in 1905, his “miracle year”).