though initially attracted to studying the black holes that were suspected of dwelling inside most massive galaxies, ghez ended up spending most of her graduate study and later postdoctoral research at the university of arizona studying stars in formation. by taking very high-resolution (detailed) imaging of regions where new stars are born, she discovered that most stars form as members of binary systems. as technologies advanced, she was able to track the orbits danced by these stellar pairings and thereby could ascertain their respective masses. now an astronomy professor at ucla, ghez has since used similar high-resolution imaging techniques to study the orbits of stars in the innermost core of the milky way. these orbits take years to delineate, so ghez and her science team have logged more than 20 years of taking super-resolution infrared images with the giant keck telescopes in hawaii. based on the resulting stellar orbits, the ucla galactic center group has settled (as we saw) on a gravitational solution that requires the presence of a supermassive black hole with a mass equivalent to 4.6 million suns—all nestled within a space smaller than that occupied by our solar system.
ghez’s achievements have been recognized with one of the “genius” awards given by the macarthur foundation. more recently, her team discovered glowing clouds of warm ionized gas that co- orbit with the stars but may be more vulnerable to the disruptive effects of the central black hole. by monitoring these clouds, the team hopes to better understand the evolution of supermassive black holes and their immediate environs. they also hope to test einstein’s general theory of relativity by carefully scrutinizing the orbits of stars that careen closest to the intensely gravitating black hole. in 2020, ghez received the nobel prize in physics for her work on the black hole at the center of the galaxy. you can see her explain her work in non-technical language in this video (https://openstax.org/l/ghez). besides her pioneering work as an astronomer, ghez competes as a master swimmer, enjoys family life as a 882 25 • the milky way galaxy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page900_img1.jpeg] mother of two children, and actively encourages other women to pursue scientific careers.
25.5 stellar populations in the galaxy learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: in the first section of this chapter, we described the thin disk, thick disk, and stellar halo. look back at table 25.1 and note some of the patterns. young stars lie in the thin disk, are rich in metals, and orbit the galaxy’s center at high speed. the stars in the halo are old, have low abundances of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium, and have highly elliptical orbits randomly oriented in direction (see figure 25.19). halo stars can plunge through the disk and central bulge, but they spend most of their time far above or below the plane of the galaxy. the stars in the thick disk are intermediate between these two extremes. let’s first see why age and heavier-element abundance are correlated and then see what these correlations tell us about the origin of our galaxy. figure 25.19 how objects orbit the galaxy. (a) in this image, you see stars in the thin disk of our galaxy in nearly circular orbits. (b) in this image, you see the motion of stars in the galaxy’s halo in randomly oriented and elliptical orbits.
two kinds of stars the discovery that there are two different kinds of stars was first made by walter baade during world war ii. as a german national, baade was not allowed to do war research as many other u.s.-based scientists were doing, so he was able to make regular use of the mount wilson telescopes in southern california. his observations were aided by the darker skies that resulted from the wartime blackout of los angeles. among the things a large telescope and dark skies enabled baade to examine carefully were other galaxies—neighbors of our milky way galaxy. we will discuss other galaxies in the next chapter (galaxies), but for now we will just mention that the nearest galaxy that resembles our own (with a similar disk and spiral structure) is often called the andromeda galaxy, after the constellation in which we find it. baade was impressed by the similarity of the mainly reddish stars in the andromeda galaxy’s nuclear bulge to those in our galaxy’s globular clusters and the halo. he also noted the difference in color between all these and the bluer stars found in the spiral arms near the sun (figure 25.20).