thinking about the ideas of space and time in einstein’s general theory of relativity, how do we explain the 1052 29 • exercises access for free at openstax.org fact that all galaxies outside our local group show a redshift? 10. astronomers have found that there is more helium in the universe than stars could have made in the 13.8 billion years that the universe has been in existence. how does the big bang scenario solve this problem? 11. describe the anthropic principle. what are some properties of the universe that make it “ready” to have life forms like you in it? 12. describe the evidence that the expansion of the universe is accelerating. thought questions 13. what is the most useful probe of the early evolution of the universe: a giant elliptical galaxy or an irregular galaxy such as the large magellanic cloud? why? 14. what are the advantages and disadvantages of using quasars to probe the early history of the universe? 15. would acceleration of the universe occur if it were composed entirely of matter (that is, if there were no dark energy)? 16. suppose the universe expands forever. describe what will become of the radiation from the primeval fireball.
what will the future evolution of galaxies be like? could life as we know it survive forever in such a universe? why? 17. some theorists expected that observations would show that the density of matter in the universe is just equal to the critical density. do the current observations support this hypothesis? 18. there are a variety of ways of estimating the ages of various objects in the universe. describe two of these ways, and indicate how well they agree with one another and with the age of the universe itself as estimated by its expansion. 19. since the time of copernicus, each revolution in astronomy has moved humans farther from the center of the universe. now it appears that we may not even be made of the most common form of matter. trace the changes in scientific thought about the central nature of earth, the sun, and our galaxy on a cosmic scale. explain how the notion that most of the universe is made of dark matter continues this “copernican tradition.” 20. the anthropic principle suggests that in some sense we are observing a special kind of universe; if the universe were different, we could never have come to exist. comment on how this fits with the copernican tradition described in exercise 29.19. 21.
penzias and wilson’s discovery of the cosmic microwave background (cmb) is a nice example of scientific serendipity—something that is found by chance but turns out to have a positive outcome. what were they looking for and what did they discover? 22. construct a timeline for the universe and indicate when various significant events occurred, from the beginning of the expansion to the formation of the sun to the appearance of humans on earth. figuring for yourself 23. suppose the hubble constant were not 22 but 33 km/s per million light-years. then what would the critical density be? 24. assume that the average galaxy contains 1011 msun and that the average distance between galaxies is 10 million light-years. calculate the average density of matter (mass per unit volume) in galaxies. what fraction is this of the critical density we calculated in the chapter? 25. the cmb contains roughly 400 million photons per m3. the energy of each photon depends on its wavelength. calculate the typical wavelength of a cmb photon. hint: the cmb is blackbody radiation at a 29 • exercises 1053 temperature of 2.73 k.
according to wien’s law, the peak wave length in nanometers is given by calculate the wavelength at which the cmb is a maximum and, to make the units consistent, convert this wavelength from nanometers to meters. 26. following up on exercise 29.25 calculate the energy of a typical photon. assume for this approximate calculation that each photon has the wavelength calculated in exercise 29.25. the energy of a photon is given by where h is planck’s constant and is equal to is the speed of light in m/s, and λ is the wavelength in m. 27. continuing the thinking in exercise 29.25 and exercise 29.26, calculate the energy in a cubic meter of space, multiply the energy per photon calculated in exercise 29.26 by the number of photons per cubic meter given above. 28. continuing the thinking in the last three exercises, convert this energy to an equivalent in mass, use einstein’s equation . hint: divide the energy per m3 calculated in exercise 29.27 by the speed of light squared. check your units; you should have an answer in kg/m3. now compare this answer with the critical density.