(credit (a): this image is copyright by the leiden observatory; credit (b): nasa/jhu/swri) it is possible to calculate that a star’s gravitational sphere of influence—the distance within which it can exert sufficient gravitation to hold onto orbiting objects—is about one third of its distance to the nearest other stars. stars in the vicinity of the sun are spaced in such a way that the sun’s sphere of influence extends a little beyond 50,000 au, or about 1 light-year. at such great distances, however, objects in orbit about the sun can be perturbed by the gravity of passing stars. some of the perturbed objects can then take on orbits that bring them much closer to the sun (while others might be lost to the solar system forever). oort suggested, therefore, that the new comets we were seeing were examples of objects orbiting the sun near the edge of its sphere of influence, whose orbits had been disturbed by nearby stars, eventually bringing them close to the sun where we can see them.1 the reservoir of ancient icy objects from which such comets are derived is now called the oort cloud. astronomers estimate that there are about a trillion comets in the oort cloud.
in addition, we estimate that about 10 times this number of icy objects could be orbiting the sun in the volume of space between the kuiper belt (which is gravitationally linked to neptune) and the oort cloud. these objects remain undiscovered because they are too faint to be seen directly and their orbits are too stable to permit any of them to be deflected inward close to the sun. the total number of icy or cometary objects in the outer reaches of our solar system could thus be on the order of 10 trillion , a very large number indeed. what is the mass represented by comets? we can make an estimate if we assume something about comet sizes and masses. let us suppose that the nucleus of comet halley is typical. its observed volume is about 600 km3. if the primary constituent is water ice with a density of about 1 g/cm3, then the total mass of halley’s nucleus must be about kilograms. this is about one ten billionth of the mass of earth. if our estimate is reasonable and there are comets with this mass out there, their total mass would be equal to about 1000 earths—comparable to the mass of all the planets put together.
therefore, icy, cometary material could be the most important constituent of the solar system after the sun itself. 1 we now know that not every comet we see originates in the kuiper belt or oort cloud. in 2017 and 2019, astronomers discovered two “interstellar comets,” (named 1i/oumuamua and 2i/borisov) whose orbits indicated that they came from outside the solar system! (oumoumua means scout or messenger in hawaiian.) 13.4 • the origin and fate of comets and related objects 461 [image: astronomy_openstax_page479_img1.jpeg] e x a m p l e 1 3 . 1 mass of the oort cloud comets suppose the oort cloud contains 1012 comets with an average diameter of 10 km each. let’s estimate the mass of the total oort cloud. solution we can start by assuming that typical comets are about the size of comets halley and borrelly, with a diameter of 10 km and a density appropriate to water ice, which is about 1 g/cm3 or 1000 kg/m3.
we know that , the volume of a sphere, and the radius, therefore, for each comet, given that , each comet’s mass is to calculate the total mass of the cloud, we multiply this typical mass for one comet by the number of comets: check your learning how does the total mass we calculated above compare to the mass of jupiter? to the mass of the sun? (give a numerical answer.) answer: the mass of jupiter is about . the mass of the oort cloud calculated above is kg. so the cloud would contain about half a jupiter of mass. the mass of the sun is . this means the oort cloud would be early evolution of the planetary system comets from the oort cloud help us sample material that formed very far from the sun, whereas the short- period comets from the kuiper belt sample materials that were planetesimals in the solar nebula disk but did not form planets. studies of the kuiper belt also are influencing our understanding of the early evolution of our planetary system. the objects in the oort cloud and the kuiper belt have different histories, and they may therefore have different compositions. astronomers are therefore very interested in comparing detailed measurements of the comets derived from these two source regions.