all stars can be placed on the hertzsprung-russell diagram (hr diagram) (see figure ) based on their electromagnetic peak frequency and their intensity. once placed on the hr diagram, their location will tell us the absolute magnitude. when we observe the star, we can measure the apparent magnitude. knowing these two values we can calculate the distance. (there will be more on hr diagrams later.) we use a formula called the distance modulus. this equation lets us input the values for the apparent brightness and the absolute brightness and results in the distance in parsecs.
equation 8: measuring distance with parallax angle: 𝛼= 90° −( 𝑃 2) distance: 𝐷= 𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡(𝛼) ∗𝐵 figure 144: the hr diagram equation 9: the distance modulus 𝐷= 10(0.2∗(𝑚−𝑀+5)) m is the apparent brightness m is the absolute brightness [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page108_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 109 cepheid variables. cepheid variable stars have a very characteristic light curve (see figure ). they also have the unique characteristic that the variation period of their light curve is directly proportional to their absolute brightness. their variation period is from days to months. they are referred to as standard candles. this means that they can be used as a standard in measuring the distance to stars and galaxies. tully-fisher relation. the tully-fisher relation is specifically suited to calculating the luminosity of a spiral galaxy.
you can then relate that luminosity to the apparent magnitude to determine the distance to the galaxy. the process looks at the width of the emission spectral lines. rotation velocity directly relates to the width of those lines. rotational velocity is an indication of the mass in the galaxy, and the more mass, the more stars. the more stars, the brighter the galaxy will be. first you must estimate the rotational velocity from the broadening of the bright spectral lines. then you can use a formula to determine its luminosity based on that rotational velocity. different frequencies have different constants, but for red light the equation is shown in equation 10. once you have the absolute magnitude to compare it to the apparent magnitude and use the distance modulus to calculate the distance.
figure 145: luminosity of cepheid variable stars figure 146: cepheid light curve equation 10: measuring luminosity with the tully-fisher relation 𝐿= −8.09 ∗log(𝑅𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑑−2.5) −21.05 [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page109_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page109_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 110 type ia supernovae. type ia supernovae are also known to be standard candles. type ia supernovae are the result of a carbon detonation supernova. it always has an absolute magnitude of -19.3. once you have the absolute magnitude to compare it to the apparent magnitude, we can use the distance modulus to calculate the distance. hubble’s law. hubble’s law is based on the red shift that is caused by the expansion of the universe. it works best for very distant objects.
the reason for this is that the farther away the object is, the less impact its proper motion will have on the red shift, so the red shift will almost entirely be due to the expansion of the universe. the recession velocity can be calculated using the equations for the doppler effect (a later component) based on the shift in the spectral lines. the distance of the galaxy is calculated using equation 11. equation 11: measuring distance with hubble’s law 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒= 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑉𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝐻0 h0 is the hubble constant = 67.8 (km/sec)/mpc hubble’s law works better the farther away you are. the greater distance minimizes the effects of the objects true motion.