many cooks will put a little oil on the pan, and this layer of oil, besides preventing sticking, increases heat transfer by filling in gaps and increasing the contact surface area. convection is heat transfer by the motion of matter that rises because it is hot and less dense. heating a fluid makes it expand, which makes it less dense, so it rises. an oven is a great example of this: the fire is at the bottom of the oven and heats the air down there, causing it to expand (becoming less dense), so it rises up to where the food is. the rising hot air carries the heat from the fire to the food by convection. this is how conventional ovens work. you may also be familiar with convection ovens that use a fan to circulate hot air for more even cooking. a scientist would object to that name because normal non-fan ovens that rely on hot air rising to circulate the heat are convection ovens; technically, the ovens that use fans to help move heat are “advection” ovens.
(you may not have heard about this because the scientists who complain loudly about misusing the terms convection and advection don’t get out much.) radiation is the transfer of heat energy by electromagnetic radiation. although microwave ovens are an obvious example of using radiation to heat food, a simpler example is a toy oven. toy ovens are powered by a very bright light bulb. the child-chefs prepare a mix for brownies or cookies, put it into a tray, and place it in the toy oven under the bright light bulb. the light and heat from the bulb hit the brownie mix and cook it. if you have ever put your hand near a bright light, you have undoubtedly noticed your hand getting warmed by the light. model stars scientists use the principles we have just described to calculate what the sun’s interior is like. these physical ideas are expressed as mathematical equations that are solved to determine the values of temperature, pressure, density, the efficiency with which photons are absorbed, and other physical quantities throughout the sun. the solutions obtained, based on a specific set of physical assumptions, provide a theoretical model for the interior of the sun. figure 16.15 schematically illustrates the predictions of a theoretical model for the sun’s interior.
energy is generated through fusion in the core of the sun, which extends only about one-quarter of the way to the surface but contains about one-third of the total mass of the sun. at the center, the temperature reaches a maximum of approximately 15 million k, and the density is nearly 150 times that of water. the energy generated in the core is transported toward the surface by radiation until it reaches a point about 70% of the distance from the center to the surface. at this point, convection begins, and energy is transported the rest of the way, primarily by rising columns of hot gas. 560 16 • the sun: a nuclear powerhouse access for free at openstax.org figure 16.15 interior structure of the sun. energy is generated in the core by the fusion of hydrogen to form helium. this energy is transmitted outward by radiation—that is, by the absorption and reemission of photons. in the outermost layers, energy is transported mainly by convection. (credit: modification of work by nasa/goddard) figure 16.16 shows how the temperature, density, rate of energy generation, and composition vary from the center of the sun to its surface. figure 16.16 interior of the sun.
diagrams showing how temperature, density, rate of energy generation, and the percentage (by mass) abundance of hydrogen vary inside the sun. the horizontal scale shows the fraction of the sun’s radius: the left edge is the very center, and the right edge is the visible surface of the sun, which is called the photosphere. 16.4 the solar interior: observations learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: explain how the sun pulsates explain what helioseismology is and what it can tell us about the solar interior discuss how studying neutrinos from the sun has helped understand neutrinos 16.4 • the solar interior: observations 561 [image: astronomy_openstax_page579_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page579_img2.jpeg] recall that when we observe the sun’s photosphere (the surface layer we see from the outside), we are not seeing very deeply into our star, certainly not into the regions where energy is generated. that’s why the title of this section—observations of the solar interior—should seem very surprising. however, astronomers have indeed devised two types of measurements that can be used to obtain information about the inner parts of the sun.