but three years later, when a predicted conjunction of jupiter and saturn was off by a month in the almagest, and off by a day in de revolutionibus, tycho was totally unimpressed. clearly, more and better observations were needed if astronomy (and the predictions of astrology) were to be valid. tycho’s father kept up the pressure, though, to give up astronomy in favor of more practical pursuits. he might have won had not the supernova of 1572 intervened. tycho made multiple observations and kept scrupulous records over the 18 months it remained visible. when he compared his observations with others from across europe, he was able to conclude that the “new star” did not occur in the sub-lunary realm where aristotle stated that all ephemeral phenomena must occur (since beyond the moon the heavens were unchangeable and perfect). tycho published his results in de nova stella (on the new star) in 1573, making tycho known [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page433_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 434 figure 474: tycho's model throughout europe.
the danish king, frederick ii, decided that tycho need not choose between statesmanship and astronomy: he awarded the island of hveen off the baltic coast of denmark for tycho to rule, and to establish an observatory funded by the king himself. needless to say, tycho immediately accepted the offer, and began construction of his observatory, uraniborg. it became the premier naked-eye observatory in europe, where tycho lived and worked until 1597, when frederick’s successor cut off funding. during that period, tycho assiduously performed thousands of observations with a large mural quadrant which was accurate to about 2’ of arc. he also observed the great comet of 1577, and again demonstrated that it could not have been in the sub-lunary realm; indeed, it must have cut through the orbits of several planets, which meant that aristotle’s model of crystalline spheres must be wrong. the path he calculated for the comet was the first known instance of non- circular motion attributed to a celestial body. after 1597, tycho wandered around europe, cutting a swathe through upper society, and gaining a reputation for his quick temper and prodigious ability to party.
back in his university days he got into a duel and had a major chunk of his nose sliced off. so tycho brazenly manufactured a metal nose (in fact he made several, of different colors and materials, so he would always be the center of attention). by the time he arrived at the court of the holy roman emperor, rudolph ii, in prague, tycho’s reputation had preceded him. rudolph loved collecting interesting people and loved to entertain, so they seemed made for each other. tycho was anxious to find a patron to pay to have his decades of observations published, and rudolph agreed; but they would have to be converted into usable tables, and they would have to be a major upgrade to the antiquated alphonsine tables still in use throughout europe. tycho immediately accepted and agreed that they would be called the rudolphine tables. thereupon he hired the best mathematician he could find to make the laborious calculations, a fellow by the name of johannes kepler. tycho and kepler had an uneasy working relationship. tycho the danish noble seemed more interested in partying than work, and was very secretive with his data.
kepler, on the other hand, was a sober and hardworking protestant commoner. but more fundamentally, kepler did not agree with tycho’s solution to the problem of the planets. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page434_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 435 figure 475: tycho brahe public domain tycho’s system was a hybrid of the ptolemaic and copernican models, which historians now call the “geo-heliocentric” system. the earth is still unmoving at the center of the cosmos, and the sun and moon both revolve around the earth. but tycho put the planets in orbit around the sun, not around the earth. the advantages of this system are that there are no conflicts with religious tradition or aristotle’s physics, and of course an unmoving earth would not predict stellar parallax. but the problem of retrograde motion is also explained as an optical illusion as in the copernican model.