superior planets the planets whose orbits are outside of the earth's orbit: mars, jupiter, saturn, uranus, and neptune. superior conjunction the point when an inferior planet is on the opposite side of the sun from the earth. supermassive black holes the very large black holes in the center of almost all galaxies. supernova when a large star has made iron in its core, fusion will cease. when this occurs, a very violent explosion blows dust and gas out into space. this is a type ii supernova. synchronous orbit synchronous orbit – when the spin of an object equals its orbital period around another object. the moon is in a synchronous orbit. the result is that the same side of the moon is always facing the earth. this is also known as being tidally locked. synchrotron radiation the radiation emitted by charged particles as they spiral around magnetic field lines. terrestrial planets those planets that are earth-like; have a rocky surface: mercury, venus, earth (terra), and mars. tharsis bulge a large bulge in the surface of mars. thermal radiation thermal radiation - the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation that is emitted from an object. the wavelength corresponds to the temperature.
cool objects radiate in the infrared, warmer objects in the red, up to hotter objects in the violet. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 414 tidal bulge the bulges in the water on earth caused by the gravity of the moon and the sun tidal force the force from the moon and the sun that causes the tides on earth. tidally locked tidally locked – when the spin of an object equals its orbital period around another object. the moon is in a tidally locked to the earth. the result is that the same side of the moon is always facing the earth. this is also known as being a synchronous orbit. tides tides are results from the gravitational attraction of one body on another. for example the rising and lowering of oceans on earth are caused by gravitational attraction of the moon and the sun. time dilation the expansion of time in the vicinity of a large mass. titan saturn’s only large moon. it is very similar to the galilean moons at jupiter. transition zone the region of the sun’s atmosphere above the chromosphere and below the corona. troposphere the bottom layer of the earth’s atmosphere. the place where the weather happens. trough the low point on the curve of a wave.
tully-fisher relation a relationship that related the rotation rate for a galaxy with its absolute magnitude. this relationship, when used with the apparent magnitude, enables you to calculate the distance to the galaxy. tuning fork diagram a model for classifying the different types of galaxies. ultraviolet light the wavelengths in the spectrum above visible light. ultraviolet telescope ultraviolet telescope - a telescope designed to detect electromagnetic radiation in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum. umbra the dark central part of a sunspot or the dark part of the earth’s shadow that is the location of the moon during a lunar eclipse. urey-miller experiment an experiment that produced amino acids in the laboratory by mimicking the early environment on earth. valles marineris a very large valley on mars, many times larger than the grand canyon. van allen radiation belts regions in the earth’s magnetosphere where charged particles are trapped by the earth’s magnetic field. variable stars stars that exhibit a characteristic brightness curve. noting the period of the curve we can calculate the absolute magnitude. and by measuring the apparent magnitude we can calculate the distance. there are two types: rr- lyrae and cepheid variables.
astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 415 visible light the wavelengths that we can see. visual binaries stars that are either far enough apart or close enough to earth that we can visually separate them. voids areas in the universe where there seem to be virtually no galaxies. water hole a range of frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum where there is very little background noise in the universe. it is just above 1 gigahertz. wavelength the distance between two crests of a wave. waves the wave form of electromagnetic radiation. weak force this is a fundamental force that governs radioactive decay in atoms. it has a very short range. white dwarfs the small white core that is the remnant of a star after fusion has ceased. x-ray bursters violent high-energy eruptions from a neutron star in a binary star system. it is caused by material from the companion star falling on the surface of the neutron star. as the gas and dust builds up and temperatures rises and a short but intense burst of x-rays is created. x-ray telescope a telescope designed to detect electromagnetic radiation in the x-ray part of the spectrum. these telescopes use nested rings as mirrors to make the reflection angle shallow and allow the focusing of x-ray photons.