there are also over 450 known moons of asteroids. moons have formed in many different ways. some appear to have formed at the time that the planets were forming and have internal structures similar to the planets. others appear to be captured asteroids or kuiper belt objects. the earth’s moon appears to have been formed from the debris of an impact by a large object with the earth. the debris was ejected out of the earth’s atmosphere and over time collected and contracted into the moon. asteroids. asteroids are rocky or metallic objects larger than 100 yards in diameter. most live in the asteroid belt between the planets mars and jupiter. some do have orbits that have been changed by interactions with other asteroids and they may travel into the inner solar system comets. comets are icy objects similar to dirty snowballs. they originated in the kuiper belt or the oort cloud, but their orbits have been modified to bring them into the inner solar system. as they approach the sun, the ices begin to turn into gases and these erupt from the surface of the comets.
the result is often a grandiose pair of tails, one composed of charged particles, the other composed of dust particles trans-neptunian objects: kuiper belt objects, the scattered disk objects, and oort cloud objects. these objects are icy chunks from the days of the formation of the solar system. they were ejected by the large planets to the kuiper belt, which is a large torus beyond the orbit of neptune, or out to the oort cloud which is much further away. the oort cloud is a spherical cloud of these icy bodies. these are the places where the comets originate. the scattered disk is the area between the kuiper belt and the oort cloud. meteoroids. at the small end of the solar system’s family are the meteoroids. there are rocky objects that are smaller than 100 yards in diameter. many are the size of grains of sand. there are countess meteoroids in interplanetary space. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 118 figure 156: our part of space component 37 – solar system blueprint every star system is unique: different planets and different distances from the star. our solar system is unique.
to fully appreciate the extent of the solar system it is helpful to put objects in the relative positions. starting with the big picture the sun is moving through the milky way galaxy. as it does, it runs into dust and gas that exists in the space between the stars; the interstellar medium. like a boat moving through the water, this creates a bow shock. the heliosphere is the region of space that is affected by charged particles flowing outward from the sun; the solar wind. it is compressed by pressure from the interstellar medium in front of the sun, and behind the sun it is extended outward. this boundary is called the heliopause (at 121 au). there is also a termination shock (at 90 au). this is the point where the solar wind abruptly drops to a very low speed. the voyager 1 spacecraft has crossed the termination shock and moved into a region called the heliosheath. this is a region where the interstellar medium is mixing with the materials of the solar wind.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page118_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 119 figure 157: the distance scale solar system details the solar system extends to a distance 50,000 times the distance from the sun to the earth. the top chart in figure shows the entire solar system from the sun to the end of the sun’s gravitational influence, the end of the oort cloud. the second chart shows the solar system from the sun to the end of the scattered disk (0 to 2000 au). the third chart shows the solar system from the sun to the end of the kuiper belt (0 to 50 au). the bottom chart shows the solar system from the sun to jupiter (0 to 5 au). note: eris, the dwarf planet, is located in the scattered disk. note: the oort cloud is located beyond the heliopause. at 50,000 au, the outer edge of the oort cloud is the limit of the sun’s gravitational influence.