as the star moves back and forth in orbit around the system’s center of mass in response to the gravitational tug of an orbiting planet, the lines in its spectrum will shift back and forth. let’s again consider the example of the sun. its radial velocity (motion toward or away from us) changes by about 13 meters per second with a period of 12 years because of the gravitational pull of jupiter. this corresponds to about 30 miles per hour, roughly the speed at which many of us drive around town. detecting motion at this level in a star’s spectrum presents an enormous technical challenge, but several groups of astronomers around the world, using specialized spectrographs designed for this purpose, have succeeded. note that the change in speed does not depend on the distance of the star from the observer. using the doppler effect to detect planets will work at any distance, as long as the star is bright enough to provide a good spectrum and a large telescope is available to make the observations (figure 21.16). figure 21.16 doppler method of detecting planets. the motion of a star around a common center of mass with an orbiting planet can be detected by measuring the changing speed of the star.
when the star is moving away from us, the lines in its spectrum show a 21.4 • planets beyond the solar system: search and discovery 717 [image: astronomy_openstax_page735_img1.jpeg] tiny redshift; when it is moving toward us, they show a tiny blueshift. the change in color (wavelength) has been exaggerated here for illustrative purposes. in reality, the doppler shifts we measure are extremely small and require sophisticated equipment to be detected. the first successful use of the doppler effect to find a planet around another star was in 1995. michel mayor and didier queloz of the geneva observatory (figure 21.17) used this technique to find a planet orbiting a star resembling our sun called 51 pegasi, about 40 light-years away. (the star can be found in the sky near the great square of pegasus, the flying horse of greek mythology, one of the easiest-to-find star patterns.) to everyone’s surprise, the planet takes a mere 4.2 days to orbit around the star.
(remember that mercury, the innermost planet in our solar system, takes 88 days to go once around the sun, so 4.2 days seems fantastically short.) figure 21.17 planet discoverers. in 1995, didier queloz and michel mayor of the geneva observatory were the first to discover a planet around a regular star (51 pegasi), for which they received the 2019 nobel prize in physics. they are seen here at an observatory in chile where they are continuing their planet hunting. (credit: weinstein/ciel et espace photos) mayor and queloz’s findings mean the planet must be very close to 51 pegasi, circling it about 7 million kilometers away (figure 21.18). at that distance, the energy of the star should heat the planet’s surface to a temperature of a few thousand degrees celsius (a bit hot for future tourism). from its motion, astronomers calculate that it has at least half the mass of jupiter1 , making it clearly a jovian and not a terrestrial-type planet. 1 the doppler method only allows us to find the minimum mass of a planet.
to determine the exact mass using the doppler shift and kepler’s laws, we must also have the angle at which the planet’s orbit is oriented to our view—something we don’t have any independent way of knowing in most cases. still, if the minimum mass is half of jupiter’s, the actual mass can only be larger than that, and we are sure that we are dealing with a jovian planet. 718 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page736_img1.jpeg] figure 21.18 hot jupiter. artist greg bacon painted this impression of a hot, jupiter-type planet orbiting close to a sunlike star. the artist shows bands on the planet like jupiter, but we only estimate the mass of most hot, jupiter-type planets from the doppler method and don’t know what conditions on the planet are like. (credit: eso) since that initial planet discovery, the rate of progress has been breathtaking. almost a thousand giant planets have been discovered using the doppler technique.