(credit: modification 330 10 • earthlike planets: venus and mars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page348_img1.jpeg] of work by nasa/jpl) all of the volcanism is the result of eruption of lava onto the surface of the planet. but the hot lava rising from the interior of a planet does not always make it to the surface. on both earth and venus, this upwelling lava can collect to produce bulges in the crust. many of the granite mountain ranges on earth, such as the sierra nevada in california, involve such subsurface volcanism. these bulges are common on venus, where they produce large circular or oval features called coronae (singular: corona) (figure 10.9). figure 10.9 the “miss piggy” corona. fotla corona is located in the plains to the south of aphrodite terra. curved fracture patterns show where the material beneath has put stress on the surface. a number of pancake and dome volcanoes are also visible. fotla was a celtic fertility goddess.
some students see a resemblance between this corona and miss piggy of the muppets (her left ear, at the top of the picture, is the pancake volcano in the upper center of the image). (credit: nasa/jpl) tectonic activity convection currents of molten material in the mantle of venus push and stretch the crust. such forces are called tectonic, and the geological features that result from these forces are called tectonic features. on venus’ lowland plains, tectonic forces have broken the lava surface to create remarkable patterns of ridges and cracks (figure 10.10). in a few places, the crust has even torn apart to generate rift valleys. the circular features associated with coronae are tectonic ridges and cracks, and most of the mountains of venus also owe their existence to tectonic forces. figure 10.10 ridges and cracks. this region of the lakshmi plains on venus has been fractured by tectonic forces to produce a cross-hatched grid of cracks and ridges. be sure to notice the fainter linear features that run perpendicular to the brighter ones.
as this is a radar image, the brightness of the ridges indicates their relative height. this image shows a region about 80 kilometers wide and 37 kilometers high. lakshmi is a hindu goddess of prosperity. (credit: modification of work by magellan team, jpl, nasa) the ishtar continent, which has the highest elevations on venus, is the most dramatic product of these tectonic forces. ishtar and its tall maxwell mountains resemble the tibetan plateau and himalayan mountains on earth. both are the product of compression of the crust, and both are maintained by the continuing forces of mantle convection. 10.2 • the geology of venus 331 [image: astronomy_openstax_page349_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page349_img2.jpeg] on venus’ surface the successful venera landers of the 1970s and early 1980s found themselves on an extraordinarily inhospitable planet, with a surface pressure of 90 bars and a temperature hot enough to melt lead and zinc. despite these unpleasant conditions, the spacecraft were able to photograph their surroundings and collect surface samples for chemical analysis before their instruments gave out.
the diffuse sunlight striking the surface was tinted red by the clouds, and the illumination level was equivalent to a heavy overcast on earth. the probes found that the rock in the landing areas is igneous, primarily basalts. examples of the venera photographs are shown in figure 10.11. each picture shows a flat, desolate landscape with a variety of rocks, some of which may be ejecta from impacts. other areas show flat, layered lava flows. there have been no further landings on venus since the 1980s. however, nasa has plans for a radar orbiter with much higher resolution than magellan, that will focus on the complex structures in the aphrodite region. some geologists think this area shows evidence of geologic plates, with past activity analogous to the plate tectonics on earth. figure 10.11 surface of venus. these views of the surface of venus are from the venera 13 spacecraft. everything is orange because the thick atmosphere of venus absorbs the bluer colors of light. the horizon is visible in the upper corner of each image.