helium precipitation droplets of helium that form in saturn’s atmosphere and drop to the lower atmosphere. this is responsible for saturn emitting more radiation than it receives from the sun. hellas basin a large depression in the surface of mars caused by a large impact. hertz the unit that frequencies are measured in. hierarchical merging galaxies are formed by mergers of smaller objects into larger and larger objects. highlands highlands – higher areas on an object like the moon. they are older than the surfaces of the maria. homogeneous on very large scales, of a few hundred mega-parsecs, every chunk of the universe is the same. horizon problem if the universe is only 10 billion years old, and we can see 13.5 billion years in opposite directions, and everywhere we look the universe is homogeneous, how can this be? to be in thermal equilibrium, the universe must have had time to communicate from one point to all other points. and this can only be done up to the speed of light. hot jupiters planets the size of jupiter or larger that orbit very close to their stars. hr diagram a tool used to chart where a star is based on its luminosity and temperature.
its full name is the hertzsprung-russell diagram. hubble’s constant a constant that defines the expansion of the universe. hubble’s law the red shift of a distant galaxy is directly related to its distance. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 404 hydrogen envelope a large cloud of hydrogen surrounding the comet coma. hydrosphere the layer of water covering much of the earth’s crust. hydrostatic equilibrium the balance between the inward pressure due to gravity and the outward pressure due to the nuclear fusion. impact theory impact theory – the scientific theory that explains the origin of the moon by a collision of a mars-sized body with the earth 4 billion years ago. inferior conjunction the point when an inferior planet is directly between the sun and the earth. inferior planets the planets whose orbits are with the earth's orbit: mercury and venus. inflation from 10-38 to 10-35 seconds after the big bang the universe went through a rapid and immense expansion in size. infrared light the waves between radio waves and visible light. infrared telescope a telescope designed to detect electromagnetic radiation in the infrared part of the spectrum. interferometry the use of multiple telescopes looking at the same object at the exact same time.
this can be done with radio, infrared and visual wavelengths. the resolution is determined by the baseline between the telescopes. the ability to see faint objects (light gathering ability) is determined by the actual surface area of the telescopes. interplanetary matter all of the stuff in the solar system that is not the sun, planets, dwarf planets, or moons. interstellar dust particles of dust in space that are rice shaped and as a result polarize the light that passes through them. interstellar medium the material (dust and gas) that exists in open space. ionosphere the top layer of the earth’s atmosphere where molecules and atoms are ionized by cosmic rays from the sun and space. io the innermost of jupiter’s galilean moons. it has active sulfur volcanos. irregular galaxies misshapen galaxies that do not fall into the other classifications. ishtar terra ishtar terra – one of the large high altitude areas on venus. isotropic the universe is the same no matter which direction you look. jovian planets those planets that are jupiter-like; gas giants: jupiter (jove), saturn, uranus, and neptune. kelvin the temperature scale used in astronomy.
it is the celsius scale adjusted so that 0 degrees is the point where all motion stops. water freezes at 273 degrees and boils at 373 degrees. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 405 kirkwood gaps locations in the asteroid belt that are in synchronous orbits with jupiter. they are places where jupiter’s gravity has causes the asteroids to migrate to higher or lower orbits. kuiper belt the region beyond neptune where icy bodies orbit the sun. it is similar to the asteroid belt. lava domes lava domes – pancake shaped structures caused by lava welling up and then subsiding. lensing an effect on light as it passes by massive objects (black holes, galaxies, galactic clusters) resulting in multiple images of a distant quasar. they often appear as streaks. lepton epoch from 10-4 to 102 seconds after the big bang. the universe has continued to cool to the point where electrons are not destroyed by high-energy photons. leptons small particles like electrons, muons, and neutrinos. light pollution man-made light reflecting off of dust in the atmosphere and bouncing back at the astronomer and the telescope. it makes it more difficult to differentiate an object from the background skies.