814 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org key terms chandrasekhar limit the upper limit to the mass of a white dwarf (equals 1.4 times the mass of the sun) degenerate gas a gas that resists further compression because no two electrons can be in the same place at the same time doing the same thing (pauli exclusion principle) millisecond pulsar a pulsar that rotates so quickly that it can give off hundreds of pulses per second (and its period is therefore measured in milliseconds) neutron star a compact object of extremely high density composed almost entirely of neutrons nova the cataclysmic explosion produced in a binary system, temporarily increasing its luminosity by hundreds to thousands of times pulsar a variable radio source of small physical size that emits very rapid radio pulses in very regular periods that range from fractions of a second to several seconds; now understood to be a rotating, magnetic neutron star that is energetic enough to produce a detectable beam of radiation and particles type ii supernova a stellar explosion produced at the endpoint of the evolution of stars whose mass exceeds roughly 10 times the mass of the sun summary 23.1 the death of low-mass stars during the course of their evolution, stars shed their outer layers and lose a significant fraction of their initial mass.
stars with masses of 8 msun or less can lose enough mass to become white dwarfs, which have masses less than the chandrasekhar limit (about 1.4 msun). the pressure exerted by degenerate electrons keeps white dwarfs from contracting to still-smaller diameters. eventually, white dwarfs cool off to become black dwarfs, stellar remnants made mainly of carbon, oxygen, and neon. 23.2 evolution of massive stars: an explosive finish in a massive star, hydrogen fusion in the core is followed by several other fusion reactions involving heavier elements. just before it exhausts all sources of energy, a massive star has an iron core surrounded by shells of silicon, sulfur, oxygen, neon, carbon, helium, and hydrogen. the fusion of iron requires energy (rather than releasing it). if the mass of a star’s iron core exceeds the chandrasekhar limit (but is less than 3 msun), the core collapses until its density exceeds that of an atomic nucleus, forming a neutron star with a typical diameter of 20 kilometers. the core rebounds and transfers energy outward, blowing off the outer layers of the star in a type ii supernova explosion.
23.3 supernova observations a supernova occurs on average once every 25 to 100 years in the milky way galaxy. despite the odds, no supernova in our galaxy has been observed from earth since the invention of the telescope. however, one nearby supernova (sn 1987a) has been observed in a neighboring galaxy, the large magellanic cloud. the star that evolved to become sn 1987a began its life as a blue supergiant, evolved to become a red supergiant, and returned to being a blue supergiant at the time it exploded. studies of sn 1987a have detected neutrinos from the core collapse and confirmed theoretical calculations of what happens during such explosions, including the formation of elements beyond iron. supernovae are a main source of high-energy cosmic rays and can be dangerous for any living organisms in nearby star systems. 23.4 pulsars and the discovery of neutron stars at least some supernovae leave behind a highly magnetic, rapidly rotating neutron star, which can be observed as a pulsar if its beam of escaping particles and focused radiation is pointing toward us.
pulsars emit rapid pulses of radiation at regular intervals; their periods are in the range of 0.001 to 10 seconds. the rotating neutron star acts like a lighthouse, sweeping its beam in a circle and giving us a pulse of radiation when the beam sweeps over earth. as pulsars age, they lose energy, their rotations slow, and their periods increase. 23 • key terms 815 23.5 the evolution of binary star systems when a white dwarf or neutron star is a member of a close binary star system, its companion star can transfer mass to it. material falling gradually onto a white dwarf can explode in a sudden burst of fusion and make a nova. if material falls rapidly onto a white dwarf, it can push it over the chandrasekhar limit and cause it to explode completely as a type ia supernova. another possible mechanism for a type ia supernova is the merger of two white dwarfs. material falling onto a neutron star can cause powerful bursts of x-ray radiation. transfer of material and angular momentum can speed up the rotation of pulsars until their periods are just a few thousandths of a second.