(note that this experiment cannot be performed easily in the southern hemisphere because polaris itself is not visible in the south and no bright star is located near the south celestial pole.) 30. what were two arguments or lines of evidence in support of the geocentric model? 31. although the copernican system was largely correct to place the sun at the center of all planetary motion, the model still gave inaccurate predictions for planetary positions. explain the flaw in the copernican model that hindered its accuracy. 32. during a retrograde loop of mars, would you expect mars to be brighter than usual in the sky, about average in brightness, or fainter than usual in the sky? explain. 33. the great pyramid of giza was constructed nearly 5000 years ago. within the pyramid, archaeologists discovered a shaft leading from the central chamber out of the pyramid, oriented for favorable viewing of the bright star thuban at that time. thinking about earth’s precession, explain why thuban might have been an important star to the ancient egyptians. 34. explain why more stars are circumpolar for observers at higher latitudes. 35. what is the altitude of the north celestial pole in the sky from your latitude?
if you do not know your latitude, look it up. if you are in the southern hemisphere, answer this question for the south celestial pole, since the north celestial pole is not visible from your location. 36. if you were to drive to some city south of your current location, how would the altitude of the celestial pole in the sky change? 37. hipparchus could have warned us that the dates associated with each of the natal astrology sun signs would eventually be wrong. explain why. 38. explain three lines of evidence that argue against the validity of astrology. 39. what did galileo discover about the planet jupiter that cast doubt on exclusive geocentrism? 40. what did galileo discover about venus that cast doubt on geocentrism? figuring for yourself 41. suppose eratosthenes had found that, in alexandria, at noon on the first day of summer, the line to the sun makes an angle 30° with the vertical. what, then, would he have found for earth’s circumference? 42. suppose eratosthenes’ results for earth’s circumference were quite accurate.
if the diameter of earth is 12,740 km, what is the length of his stadium in kilometers? 43. suppose you are on a strange planet and observe, at night, that the stars do not rise and set, but circle parallel to the horizon. next, you walk in a constant direction for 8000 miles, and at your new location on the planet, you find that all stars rise straight up in the east and set straight down in the west, perpendicular to the horizon. how could you determine the circumference of the planet without any further observations? what is the circumference, in miles, of the planet? 2 • exercises 67 68 2 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 3.1 international space station. this space habitat and laboratory orbits earth once every 90 minutes.
(credit: modification of work by nasa) chapter outline 3.1 the laws of planetary motion 3.2 newton’s great synthesis 3.3 newton’s universal law of gravitation 3.4 orbits in the solar system 3.5 motions of satellites and spacecraft 3.6 gravity with more than two bodies thinking ahead how would you find a new planet at the outskirts of our solar system that is too dim to be seen with the unaided eye and is so far away that it moves very slowly among the stars? this was the problem confronting astronomers during the nineteenth century as they tried to pin down a full inventory of our solar system. if we could look down on the solar system from somewhere out in space, interpreting planetary motions would be much simpler. but the fact is, we must observe the positions of all the other planets from our own moving planet. scientists of the renaissance did not know the details of earth’s motions any better than the motions of the other planets. their problem, as we saw in observing the sky: the birth of astronomy, was that they had to deduce the nature of all planetary motion using only their earthbound observations of the other planets’ positions in the sky.