here was a decisive moment in the history of human thought: it was not necessary to have only circles in order to have an acceptable cosmos. the universe could be a bit more complex than the greek philosophers had wanted it to be. kepler’s second law deals with the speed with which each planet moves along its ellipse, also known as its orbital speed. working with brahe’s observations of mars, kepler discovered that the planet speeds up as it comes closer to the sun and slows down as it pulls away from the sun. he expressed the precise form of this relationship by imagining that the sun and mars are connected by a straight, elastic line. when mars is closer to the sun (positions 1 and 2 in figure 3.5), the elastic line is not stretched as much, and the planet moves rapidly. farther from the sun, as in positions 3 and 4, the line is stretched a lot, and the planet does not move 72 3 • orbits and gravity access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page90_img1.jpeg] so fast.
as mars travels in its elliptical orbit around the sun, the elastic line sweeps out areas of the ellipse as it moves (the colored regions in our figure). kepler found that in equal intervals of time (t), the areas swept out in space by this imaginary line are always equal; that is, the area of the region b from 1 to 2 is the same as that of region a from 3 to 4. if a planet moves in a circular orbit, the elastic line is always stretched the same amount and the planet moves at a constant speed around its orbit. but, as kepler discovered, in most orbits that speed of a planet orbiting its star (or moon orbiting its planet) tends to vary because the orbit is elliptical. figure 3.5 kepler’s second law: the law of equal areas. the orbital speed of a planet traveling around the sun (the circular object inside the ellipse) varies in such a way that in equal intervals of time (t), a line between the sun and a planet sweeps out equal areas (a and b). note that the eccentricities of the planets’ orbits in our solar system are substantially less than shown here.
the kepler's second law demonstrator (https://openstax.org/l/30kepsecond) from ccny's sciencesims project shows how an orbiting planet sweeps out the same area in the same time. kepler’s third law kepler’s first two laws of planetary motion describe the shape of a planet’s orbit and allow us to calculate the speed of its motion at any point in the orbit. kepler was pleased to have discovered such fundamental rules, but they did not satisfy his quest to fully understand planetary motions. he wanted to know why the orbits of the planets were spaced as they are and to find a mathematical pattern in their movements—a “harmony of the spheres” as he called it. for many years he worked to discover mathematical relationships governing planetary spacing and the time each planet took to go around the sun. in 1619, kepler discovered a basic relationship to relate the planets’ orbits to their relative distances from the sun. we define a planet’s orbital period, (p), as the time it takes a planet to travel once around the sun. also, recall that a planet’s semimajor axis, a, is equal to its average distance from the sun.
the relationship, now known as kepler’s third law, says that a planet’s orbital period squared is proportional to the semimajor axis of its orbit cubed, or when p (the orbital period) is measured in years, and a is expressed in a quantity known as an astronomical unit (au), the two sides of the formula are not only proportional but equal. one au is the average distance between earth and the sun and is approximately equal to kilometers. in these units, link to learning 3.1 • the laws of planetary motion 73 [image: astronomy_openstax_page91_img1.jpeg] kepler’s third law applies to all objects orbiting the sun, including earth, and provides a means for calculating their relative distances from the sun from the time they take to orbit. let’s look at a specific example to illustrate how useful kepler’s third law is. for instance, suppose you time how long mars takes to go around the sun (in earth years). kepler’s third law can then be used to calculate mars’ average distance from the sun.