if they let go of the ball, it doesn’t fall to the bottom of the box or anywhere else but merely stays there or moves in a straight line, depending on whether it is given any motion. astronauts in the international space station (iss) that is orbiting earth live in an environment just like that of the people sealed in a freely falling box (figure 24.5). the orbiting iss is actually “falling” freely around earth. while in free fall, the astronauts live in a strange world where there seems to be no gravitational force. one can give a wrench a shove, and it moves at constant speed across the orbiting laboratory. a pencil set in midair remains there as if no force were acting on it. 24.1 • introducing general relativity 829 [image: astronomy_openstax_page847_img1.jpeg] figure 24.5 astronauts aboard the space shuttle. shane kimbrough and sandra magnus are shown aboard the endeavour in 2008 with various fruit floating freely. because the shuttle is in free fall as it orbits earth, everything—including astronauts—stays put or moves uniformly relative to the walls of the spacecraft. this free-falling state produces a lack of apparent gravity inside the spacecraft.
(credit: nasa) in the “weightless” environment of the international space station, moving takes very little effort. watch astronaut karen nyberg (https://openstax.org/l/30isszerogravid) demonstrate how she can propel herself with the force of a single human hair. appearances are misleading, however. there is a force in this situation. both the iss and the astronauts continually fall around earth, pulled by its gravity. but since all fall together—shuttle, astronauts, wrench, and pencil—inside the iss all gravitational forces appear to be absent. thus, the orbiting iss provides an excellent example of the principle of equivalence—how local effects of gravity can be completely compensated by the right acceleration. to the astronauts, falling around earth creates the same effects as being far off in space, remote from all gravitational influences. the paths of light and matter einstein postulated that the equivalence principle is a fundamental fact of nature, and that there is no experiment inside any spacecraft by which an astronaut can ever distinguish between being weightless in remote space and being in free fall near a planet like earth. this would apply to experiments done with beams of light as well.
but the minute we use light in our experiments, we are led to some very disturbing conclusions—and it is these conclusions that lead us to general relativity and a new view of gravity. it seems apparent to us, from everyday observations, that beams of light travel in straight lines. imagine that a spaceship is moving through empty space far from any gravity. send a laser beam from the back of the ship to the front, and it will travel in a nice straight line and land on the front wall exactly opposite the point from which it left the rear wall. if the equivalence principle really applies universally, then this same experiment performed in free fall around earth should give us the same result. now imagine that the astronauts again shine a beam of light along the length of their ship. but, as shown in figure 24.6, this time the orbiting space station falls a bit between the time the light leaves the back wall and the time it hits the front wall. (the amount of the fall is grossly exaggerated in figure 24.6 to illustrate the effect.) therefore, if the beam of light follows a straight line but the ship’s path curves downward, then the light should strike the front wall at a point higher than the point from which it left.
link to learning 830 24 • black holes and curved spacetime access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page848_img1.jpeg] figure 24.6 curved light path. in a spaceship moving to the left (in this figure) in its orbit about a planet, light is beamed from the rear, a, toward the front, b. meanwhile, the ship is falling out of its straight path (exaggerated here). we might therefore expect the light to strike at b′, above the target in the ship. instead, the light follows a curved path and strikes at c. in order for the principle of equivalence to be correct, gravity must be able to curve the path of a light beam just as it curves the path of the spaceship. however, this would violate the principle of equivalence—the two experiments would give different results. we are thus faced with giving up one of our two assumptions. either the principle of equivalence is not correct, or light does not always travel in straight lines. instead of dropping what probably seemed at the time like a ridiculous idea, einstein worked out what happens if light sometimes does not follow a straight path. let’s suppose the principle of equivalence is right.