link to learning 1046 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org key terms anthropic principle idea that physical laws must be the way they are because otherwise we could not be here to measure them big bang the theory of cosmology in which the expansion of the universe began with a primeval explosion (of space, time, matter, and energy) closed universe a model in which the universe expands from a big bang, stops, and then contracts to a big crunch cosmic microwave background (cmb) microwave radiation coming from all directions that is the redshifted afterglow of the big bang cosmological constant the term in the equations of general relativity that represents a repulsive force in the universe cosmology the study of the organization and evolution of the universe critical density in cosmology, the density that is just sufficient to bring the expansion of the universe to a stop after infinite time dark energy the energy that is causing the expansion of the universe to accelerate; its existence is inferred from observations of distant supernovae dark matter nonluminous material, whose nature we don’t yet understand, but whose presence can be inferred because of its gravitational influence on luminous matter deuterium a form of hydrogen in which the nucleus of each atom consists of one proton and one neutron flat universe a model of the universe that has a critical density and in which the geometry of the universe is flat, like a sheet of paper fusion the building of heavier atomic nuclei from lighter ones grand unified theories (guts) physical theories that attempt to describe the four forces of nature as different manifestations of a single force inflationary universe a theory of cosmology in which the universe is assumed to have undergone a phase of very rapid expansion when the universe was about 10–35 second old; after this period of rapid expansion, the standard big bang and inflationary models are identical lithium the third element in the periodic table; lithium nuclei with three protons and four neutrons were manufactured during the first few minutes of the expansion of the universe multiverse the speculative idea that our universe is just one of many universes, each with its own set of physical laws open universe a model in which the density of the universe is not high enough to bring the expansion of the universe to a halt photon decoupling time when radiation began to stream freely through the universe without interacting with matter weakly interacting massive particles (wimps) weakly interacting massive particles are one of the candidates for the composition of dark matter summary 29.1 the age of the universe cosmology is the study of the organization and evolution of the universe.
the universe is expanding, and this is one of the key observational starting points for modern cosmological theories. modern observations show that the rate of expansion has not been constant throughout the life of the universe. initially, when galaxies were close together, the effects of gravity were stronger than the effects of dark energy, and the expansion rate gradually slowed. as galaxies moved farther apart, the influence of gravity on the expansion rate weakened. measurements of distant supernovae show that when the universe was about half its current age, dark energy began to dominate the rate of expansion and caused it to speed up. in order to estimate the age of the universe, we must allow for changes in the rate of expansion. after allowing for these effects, 29 • key terms 1047 astronomers estimate that all of the matter within the observable universe was concentrated in an extremely small volume 13.8 billion years ago, a time we call the big bang. 29.2 a model of the universe for describing the large-scale properties of the universe, a model that is isotropic and homogeneous (same everywhere) is a pretty good approximation of reality.
the universe is expanding, which means that the universe undergoes a change in scale with time; space stretches and distances grow larger by the same factor everywhere at a given time. observations show that the mass density of the universe is less than the critical density. in other words, there is not enough matter in the universe to stop the expansion. with the discovery of dark energy, which is accelerating the rate of expansion, the observational evidence is strong that the universe will expand forever. observations tell us that the expansion started about 13.8 billion years ago. 29.3 the beginning of the universe lemaître, alpher, and gamow first worked out the ideas that are today called the big bang theory. the universe cools as it expands. the energy of photons is determined by their temperature, and calculations show that in the hot, early universe, photons had so much energy that when they collided with one another, they could produce material particles. as the universe expanded and cooled, protons and neutrons formed first, then came electrons and positrons. next, fusion reactions produced deuterium, helium, and lithium nuclei.