a modern theoretical astrophysicist albert einstein (1879-1955). albert einstein had the ability to imagine things that most of us would never imagine to imagine. his thought experiments that he used to think through new and different explanations for the way the universe works are legendary. einstein received a nobel prize for his explanation of the photoelectric effect which paved the way for our understanding of how light behaves as photons (particles). he also created the special theory of relativity and general theory of relativity over 100 years ago. relativity explains why newton’s laws do not quite work with mercury’s orbit around the sun. they also make gps possible. figure 68: albert einstein figure 67 maria mitchell painting by h. dasell (1851) public domain [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page60_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page60_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 61 *** section iii.
astronomy – measurement [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page61_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 62 figure 69: lines of latitude component 17 – earth-based coordinates earth coordinates here on earth, we use a spherical coordinate system of latitude and longitude. latitude (see figure 69) defines how far above or below the equator an object is located. the drawing to the right shows how the lines of latitude are arranged on the surface of the earth. latitude is measured in degrees, arc-minutes, and arc-seconds. 0 degrees is the equator and the poles are at 90 degrees. these angles are measured from the center of the earth. longitude (see figure 70) defines where an object is located as you move around the earth. the drawing to the left shows how the lines of longitude are arranged on the surface of the earth. lines of longitude start at the north pole, circle the earth, and pass through the south pole. longitude is measured in degrees, arc-minutes, and arc-seconds. we need to define a starting point, or where the longitude equals zero.
this line was defined as the longitude line that passes through the royal observatory in greenwich, england. these angles are measured from the center of the earth too. figure 70: lines of longitude [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page62_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page62_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 63 right ascension and declination a coordinate system that astronomers use extends the latitude and longitude system that we use on earth. it is measured in right ascension and declination. declination values (see figure 71) are latitude values extended into space. declination is measured from the celestial equator in degrees, arc- minutes, and arc-seconds. 0 degrees is on the celestial equator. +90 degrees, or 90° n, is the north celestial pole (celestial north), and -90 degrees, or 90° s, is the south celestial pole. the earth’s equator is extended out into space and is called the celestial equator. right ascension values are longitude values extended out into space. but, we do not use degrees; we use hours to measure the right ascension values.
each hour of right ascension is equal to 15 degrees. this means there are 24 hours of right ascension, just as there are 24 hours in a day. they are measured in hours, arc-minutes, and arc-seconds. the 0 hour line for right ascension passes through the royal observatory in greenwich, england on the vernal equinox. looking down from the celestial north pole at the celestial equator we would see a circle marked off in 24 hours of right ascension (0 hours through 23 hours). this coordinate system, right ascension and declination, is a good system for conveying information to other astronomers or people who are not standing right next to you. stars and deep space objects do not move in relation to right ascension and declination, except over very long periods of time.