riess (stsci)) the result of painstaking, careful study of these supernovae in a range of galaxies, carried out by two groups of researchers, was published in 1998. it was shocking—and so revolutionary that their discovery received the 2011 nobel prize in physics. what the researchers found was that these type ia supernovae in distant galaxies were fainter than expected from hubble’s law, given the measured redshifts of their host galaxies. in other words, distances estimated from the supernovae used as standard bulbs disagreed with the distances measured from the redshifts. if the universe were decelerating, we would expect the far-away supernovae to be brighter than expected. the slowing down would have kept them closer to us. instead, they were fainter, which at first seemed to make no sense. before accepting this shocking development, astronomers first explored the possibility that the supernovae might not really be as useful as standard bulbs as they thought. perhaps the supernovae appeared too faint because dust along our line of sight to them absorbed some of their light. or perhaps the supernovae at large distances were for some reason intrinsically less luminous than nearby supernovae of type ia.
a host of more detailed observations ruled out these possibilities. scientists then had to consider the 29.1 • the age of the universe 1009 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1027_img1.jpeg] alternative that the distance estimated from the redshift was incorrect. distances derived from redshifts assume that the hubble constant has been truly constant for all time. we saw that one way it might not be constant is that the expansion is slowing down. but suppose neither assumption is right (steady speed or slowing down.) suppose, instead, that the universe is accelerating. if the universe is expanding faster now than it was billions of years ago, our motion away from the distant supernovae has sped up since the explosion occurred, sweeping us farther away from them. the light of the explosion has to travel a greater distance to reach us than if the expansion rate were constant. the farther the light travels, the fainter it appears. this conclusion would explain the supernova observations in a natural way, and this has now been substantiated by many additional observations over the last couple of decades. it really seems that the expansion of the universe is accelerating, a notion so unexpected that astronomers at first resisted considering it. how can the expansion of the universe be speeding up?
if you want to accelerate your car, you must supply energy by stepping on the gas. similarly, energy must be supplied to accelerate the expansion of the universe. the discovery of the acceleration was shocking because scientists still have no idea what the source of the energy is. scientists call whatever it is dark energy, which is a clear sign of how little we understand it. note that this new component of the universe is not the dark matter we talked about in earlier chapters. dark energy is something else that we have also not yet detected in our laboratories on earth. what is dark energy? one possibility is that it is the cosmological constant, which is an energy associated with the vacuum of “empty” space itself. quantum mechanics (the intriguing theory of how things behave at the atomic and subatomic levels) tells us that the source of this vacuum energy might be tiny elementary particles that flicker in and out of existence everywhere throughout the universe. various attempts have been made to calculate how big the effects of this vacuum energy should be, but so far these attempts have been unsuccessful.
in fact, the order of magnitude of theoretical estimates of the vacuum energy based on the quantum mechanics of matter and the value required to account for the acceleration of the expansion of the universe differ by an incredible factor of at least 10120 (that is a 1 followed by 120 zeros)! various other theories have been suggested, but the bottom line is that, although there is compelling evidence that dark energy exists, we do not yet know the source of that energy. whatever the dark energy turns out to be, we should note that the discovery that the rate of expansion has not been constant since the beginning of the universe complicates the calculation of the age of the universe. interestingly, the acceleration seems not to have started with the big bang. during the first several billion years after the big bang, when galaxies were close together, gravity was strong enough to slow the expansion. as galaxies moved farther apart, the effect of gravity weakened. several billion years after the big bang, dark energy took over, and the expansion began to accelerate (figure 29.4). 1010 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org figure 29.4 changes in the rate of expansion of the universe since its beginning 13.8 billion years ago.