these early humans discovered that the cycles in the stars would repeat year after year. to use the sky as a calendar, you need to be able to identify specific stars and groupings of stars. although those groupings have changed over the years and from culture to culture, many cultures have created constellations to identify those groupings. the babylonians. the earliest evidence that we have found that demonstrate the use of constellations to map the sky date back to approximately 3000 bce. they were found in mesopotamia (in modern iraq). it appears that most of their constellations were created from 1300 to 1000 bce. these constellations were often adopted by the greeks and romans and modified to utilize their myths. the babylonians had two functions for their constellations. one was related to their gods and symbols, the other was a farming calendar and contained everyday items such as farm workers, animals, and tools related to farming. the chinese. the oldest record of a star chart with constellations done by the chinese is from 1092 ce. there is much evidence of the chinese charting the night sky for thousands of years prior to this.
there is some evidence that suggests that the chinese constellations may have been influenced by those of mesopotamia. chinese astronomers were very accurately recording astronomical events and phenomina for millennia. the indians (of india). indian astronomers were also influenced by the mesopotamians. but there is evidence that they were recording astronomical events for many millennia. these constellations were largely based on their religion. their oldest texts date back to 1400 to 1200 bce. the egyptians. egyptian astronomy began earlier than 4000 bce. there are ancient stone circles that appear to be based on astronomical events and alignments. starting at about 300 bce the greek and babylonian astronomy began to influence the egyptian astronomy. the greeks. much of the astronomy from the greeks was adopted from the babylonians before 300 bce. the constellations were often changed to reflect greek mythology and gods. the romans. roman astronomy was very closely related to the greek astronomy. constellations were again changed to reflect roman mythology and legends.
astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 30 figure 19: ursa minor drawing by john flamsteed (1729) stick figure iau boundaries arabians. between 700 and 1500 ce the islamic world was making great strides in astronomy. this coincides with the dark ages in europe. during this time, the europeans were not progressing much in astronomy. many of the star names in use today as well as some of the terminology can be traced to islamic roots. the modern era. stars and constellations of the far south were not visible from northern africa, asia, and europe. these constellations and stars were named by explorers from those areas that first travelled southward around 1600 ce. modern constellations. the modern constellations were defined by the international astronomical union (iau) in 1922 ce. there are officially 88 constellations defined. these constellations, although often represented by images or stick figures, actually occupy a region of the sky. the iau defined the limits of those regions and the lines follow lines of right ascension and declination.
note: all of the stars within the iau boundaries are considered part of that constellation, whether they are part of the stick figure or not. boundaries are along lines of right ascension and declination. note: the iau boundaries cover the entire sky. there will never be a need to change the existing constellations and we will never need more constellations. note: the curved boundaries in the image on the right are due to the constellation being so close to the north celestial pole that the lines of declination appear as curves. there are 88 constellations. the international astronomical union (iau) set the current list of constellations [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page30_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page30_img2.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page30_img3.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 31 component 6 – nothing is perfect in astronomy perfection is a unique state. a circle is a unique case of the broad class of ellipses. a sphere is a unique case of the broad class of ellipsoids.