along the way, he produced a special telescope for viewing light from his furnaces through a prism, which he also used on light from the sun: this was the invention of the spectroscope (he catalogued 574 absorption lines in the solar spectrum, and the brightest of these are still called the fraunhofer lines). word gradually spread of the remarkable results he was getting, and astronomers were insistent that he build telescopes for them. when he finally decided to do so, he also made innovations in mounting and controlling telescopes. this figure shows the design for the dorpat refractor, built for astronomer wilhelm struve, and completed in 1824. the 9.5” objective lens was not only the largest, clearest, most flawless of any lens ever produced up to that time; fraunhofer had corrected it for chromatic aberration (the tendency of a lens to focus light of different colors at different focal points, making for a very annoying rainbow effect). this was the first precision achromatic telescope. the mounting was also innovative. one axis is oriented to the celestial pole, making it possible to track stellar movements by simple rotation around that axis.
note the weight-driven mechanism for that turning, which was designed to match the rate at which celestial objects appear to move [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page454_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page454_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 455 across the sky. this was the invention of the so-called “german equatorial” mount, bavaria then being a part of greater germany. unfortunately, fraunhofer would only live long enough to complete one more telescope, the konigsberg heliometer that friedrich bessel used. here you can see how the mounting is the same as for the dorpat refractor. the difference is that the telescope’s objective lens is really two lenses mounted side by side. fraunhofer crafted a 6” achromatic lens, then, using a diamond, cut the lens in half. so bessel actually had two telescopes. the advantages of this design were two-fold: atmospheric disturbances that plague all telescopes would be exactly the same in each telescope, which would now be easy to deal with; the second was that measurements of star positions would be more accurate, as the operator positioned the two images to overlap.
using a micrometer indicator, the amount of the lens movement could be determined very precisely. so even though the 6” objective was much smaller than the 9.5” objective of the dorpat refractor that struve was using, the konigsberg refractor was significantly more precise. joseph fraunhofer lived long enough to see that the konigsberg refractor was completed to his specifications, but died in 1826 before bessel received it. he had established a new standard for precision astronomy both in conception and in fabrication. friedrich bessel (1784-1846) friedrich bessel was the son of a low-level government functionary, so at age 15 he dropped out of school and migrated to the bustling port city of bremen where he signed on as an apprentice for an import-export firm. his days were spent writing and copying business correspondence, but at night he studied finance and overseas trade. he hoped one day to involve himself in international trade and traveling the world. bessel discovered that he loved the precision of numbers, and by age 20 he had become a rising star in his firm’s accounting office by self-study and talent.
in preparation for his planned travels, he began the study of navigation, and soon mastered the use of sextants, chronometers, charts, and tables. this is where he got bitten by the astronomy bug. he quickly mastered newton’s principia and the works of edmond halley, after which he decided to calculate more precisely the orbit of halley’s comet. wishing to check his work, he contacted bremen’s leading astronomer, wilhelm olbers. olbers was quite impressed with the young man, and consulted with his good friend, carl friedrich gauss, the pre-eminent mathematician of the early 19th century. they decided to help bessel get a job in astronomy. thus it was that bessel gave up his dreams of an exciting life as a world traveler and settled in lilienthal, a small, bucolic village where he served as an assistant to its resident astronomer. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 456 using a reflector set up much the same as herschel’s, bessel learned at first hand the frustrations of trying to carry out observations that involved a team of assistants to move the telescope and try to get it pointing at his target star.