after one half-life, half the sample is left; after two half-lives, one half of the remainder (or one quarter) is left; and after three half-lives, one half of that (or one eighth) is left. note that, in reality, the decay of radioactive elements in a rock sample would not cause any visible change in the appearance of the rock; the splashes of color are shown here for conceptual purposes only. if you had 1 gram of pure radioactive nuclei with a half-life of 100 years, then after 100 years you would have 1/2 gram; after 200 years, 1/4 gram; after 300 years, only 1/8 gram; and so forth. however, the material does not disappear. instead, the radioactive atoms are replaced with their decay products. sometimes the radioactive atoms are called parents and the decay products are called daughter elements. in this way, radioactive elements with half-lives we have determined can provide accurate nuclear clocks. by comparing how much of a radioactive parent element is left in a rock to how much of its daughter products have accumulated, we can learn how long the decay process has been going on and hence how long ago the rock formed.
table 7.3 summarizes the decay reactions used most often to date lunar and terrestrial rocks. 7.3 • dating planetary surfaces 243 [image: astronomy_openstax_page261_img1.jpeg] radioactive decay reaction used to date rocks4 parent daughter half-life (billions of years) samarium-147 neodymium-143 106 rubidium-87 strontium-87 48.8 thorium-232 lead-208 14.0 uranium-238 lead-206 4.47 potassium-40 argon-40 1.31 table 7.3 pbs provides an evolution series excerpt (https://openstax.org/l/30pbsradiomat) that explains how we use radioactive elements to date earth. this radioactive (https://openstax.org/l/30radiodecay) decay simulator lets you examine how the number of atoms of a radioactive element decreases over time and see how the ratio of parent to child atoms could be used to figure out the age of the whole set of atoms. when astronauts first flew to the moon, one of their most important tasks was to bring back lunar rocks for radioactive age-dating.
until then, astronomers and geologists had no reliable way to measure the age of the lunar surface. counting craters had let us calculate relative ages (for example, the heavily cratered lunar highlands were older than the dark lava plains), but scientists could not measure the actual age in years. some thought that the ages were as young as those of earth’s surface, which has been resurfaced by many geological events. for the moon’s surface to be so young would imply active geology on our satellite. only in 1969, when the first apollo samples were dated, did we learn that the moon is an ancient, geologically dead world. using such dating techniques, we have been able to determine the ages of both earth and the moon: each was formed about 4.5 billion years ago (although, as we shall see, earth probably formed earlier than the moon). we should also note that the decay of radioactive nuclei generally releases energy in the form of heat. although the energy from a single nucleus is not very large (in human terms), the enormous numbers of radioactive nuclei in a planet or moon (especially early in its existence) can be a significant source of internal energy for that world.
geologists estimate that about half of earth’s current internal heat budget comes from the decay of radioactive isotopes in its interior. link to learning 4 the number after each element is its atomic weight, equal to the number of protons plus neutrons in its nucleus. this specifies the isotope of the element; different isotopes of the same element differ in the number of neutrons. 244 7 • other worlds: an introduction to the solar system access for free at openstax.org 7.4 origin of the solar system learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: much of astronomy is motivated by a desire to understand the origin of things: to find at least partial answers to age-old questions of where the universe, the sun, earth, and we ourselves came from. each planet and moon is a fascinating place that may stimulate our imagination as we try to picture what it would be like to visit. taken together, the members of the solar system preserve patterns that can tell us about the formation of the entire system. as we begin our exploration of the planets, we want to introduce our modern picture of how the solar system formed.