recall, for example, that it would be extremely difficult to account for the abundance of oxygen in earth’s atmosphere except by the presence of biology. but it has been hypothesized that oxygen could build up to substantial levels on planets orbiting m-dwarf stars through the action of ultraviolet radiation on the atmosphere—with no need for biology. it will be critical to understand where such “false positives” might exist in carrying out our search. we need to understand that we might not be able to detect biospheres even if they exist. life has flourished on earth for perhaps 3.5 billion years, but the atmospheric “biosignatures” that, today, would supply good evidence for life to distant astronomers have not been present for all of that time. oxygen, for example, accumulated to detectable levels in our atmosphere only a little over 2 billion years ago. could life on earth have been detected before that time? scientists are working actively to understand what additional features might have provided evidence of life on earth during that early history, and thereby help our chances of finding life beyond. figure 30.17 spectrum of light transmitted through earth’s atmosphere. this graph shows wavelengths ranging from ultraviolet (far left) to infrared.
the many downward “spikes” come from absorption of particular wavelengths by molecules in earth’s atmosphere. some of these compounds, like water and the combination oxygen/ozone and methane, might reveal earth as both habitable and inhabited. we will have to rely on this sort of information to seek life on exoplanets, but our spectra will be of much poorer quality than this one, in part because we will receive so little light from the planet. (credit: modification of work by nasa) 30.4 the search for extraterrestrial intelligence learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: explain why spaceships from extraterrestrial civilizations are unlikely to have visited us list efforts by humankind to communicate with other civilizations via messages on spacecraft understand the various seti programs scientists are undertaking 30.4 • the search for extraterrestrial intelligence 1075 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1093_img1.jpeg] given all the developments discussed in this chapter, it seems likely that life could have developed on many planets around other stars. even if that life is microbial, we saw that we may soon have ways to search for chemical biosignatures.
this search is of fundamental importance for understanding biology, but it does not answer the question, “are we alone?” that we raised at the beginning of this chapter. when we ask this question, many people think of other intelligent creatures, perhaps beings that have developed technology similar to our own. if any intelligent, technical civilizations have arisen, as has happened on earth in the most recent blink of cosmic time, how could we make contact with them? this problem is similar to making contact with people who live in a remote part of earth. if students in the united states want to converse with students in australia, for example, they have two choices. either one group gets on an airplane and travels to meet the other, or they communicate by sending a message remotely. given how expensive airline tickets are, most students would probably select the message route. in the same way, if we want to get in touch with intelligent life around other stars, we can travel, or we can try to exchange messages. because of the great distances involved, interstellar space travel would be very slow and prohibitively expensive. the fastest spacecraft the human species has built so far would take almost 80,000 years to get to the nearest star.
while we could certainly design a faster craft, the more quickly we require it to travel, the greater the energy cost involved. to reach neighboring stars in less than a human life span, we would have to travel close to the speed of light. in that case, however, the expense would become truly astronomical. interstellar travel bernard oliver, an engineer with an abiding interest in life elsewhere, made a revealing calculation about the costs of rapid interstellar space travel. since we do not know what sort of technology we (or other civilizations) might someday develop, oliver considered a trip to the nearest star (and back again) in a spaceship with a “perfect engine”—one that would convert its fuel into energy with 100% efficiency. even with a perfect engine, the energy cost of a single round-trip journey at 70% the speed of light turns out to be equivalent to several hundred thousand years’ worth of total u.s. electrical energy consumption. the cost of such travel is literally out of this world. this is one reason astronomers are so skeptical about claims that ufos are spaceships from extraterrestrial civilizations.