local bubble the region in which the sun is that has less gas and dust than average for space. this results in more ultraviolet light being able to reach earth. luminosity a star’s absolute brightness as seen from 10 parsecs away. luminosity class from roman numeral i through v. class v stars are on the main sequence. class i is divided up into two groups ia and ib. lyman alpha forest the series of red shifted lyman alpha lines apparent in the spectrum of a quasar due to the light passing through multiple dust clouds on its way to the observer. lyman series the photons emitted when an electron returns to the ground state. different photons come from electrons at different initial excited states. magnetosphere the zone above the earth’s atmosphere where charged particles are captured. magnitude the apparent brightness of a star as seen from earth is called apparent magnitude. absolute magnitude is based on a standard scale and is the apparent magnitude as seen at 10 parsecs distance. main belt asteroid those asteroids that orbit in the asteroid belt. main sequence turnoff the stage of a star’s life where it spends most of its life in a very stable state.
main sequence turnoff the point in the hr diagram for a globular cluster where the stars have left the main sequence and are becoming astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 406 red giants. it tells us the age of the globular cluster. mantle a thick layer on earth surrounding the cores. maria maria – (mare is the singular form) large craters on the moon that have been filled by molten rock. they appear black when you look at the moon. matter dominated as the universe expanded and cooled, matter could form and overtime the density of matter exceeded the density of energy. matter era the time during which matter has dominated the universe. it includes these epochs: atomic, galactic, and stellar, and brings us to the present time. mesosphere the layer of the earth’s atmosphere above the stratosphere. meteor the glowing trail of a meteorite traversing the earth’s atmosphere. meteor shower multiple meteors that appear to originate in the same radiant. meteor storm a heavy duty meteor shower. meteorite a meteor that has made it to the ground and appears as a rock. meteoroid a small rocky body. smaller than an asteroid, and most are debris from comet tails.
mid-atlantic ridge a ridge formed in the middle of the atlantic ocean where material is coming up to fill a split between two separating plates and has formed a ridge. milky way galaxy the galaxy in which the solar system resides. millisecond pulsars pulsars that rotate so rapidly that they flash the earth every few milliseconds. it is believed that they are the result of incoming material increasing the spin of the neutron star. molecular clouds clouds of dust and gas that have a high concentration of molecules. molecular rotation a feature of molecules that emits radio waves when a rotation state returns to a lower energy state. molecular vibration a feature of molecules that emits infrared light when a vibration state returns to a lower energy state. molecules a collection of two or more atoms that are chemically bound. moon any natural object orbiting another object (other than the sun). nebular theory the scientific theory that describes how the solar nebula transformed into the planets of the solar system neutron capture the activity of an atom absorbing a neutron from the environment and transforming into an atom with a higher atomic mass. there is a slow process and a rapid process.
neutron capture the activity of an atom absorbing a neutron from the astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 407 environment and transforming into a higher atom. there is a slow process and a rapid process. neutron degeneracy pressure the point at which the electrons are pushed into the nucleus of an atom. neutron star a large star, at the end of its life. if it is between 1.4 and 3 solar masses, the atoms will all collapse upon themselves and become a giant ball of neutrons. newtonian focus the point where the image is in focus in a reflecting telescope after bouncing off the secondary mirror and exiting the tube near the top end. newtonian telescope the type of telescope that isaac newton invented. it is a simple reflector utilizing the newtonian focus. nova a surface explosion on a white dwarf that is collecting material from its companion (semi-detached binary). when the white dwarf collects enough material and the temperature rises enough, violent hydrogen fusion ignites on the surface of the white dwarf and material is blown off into space.