the temperature and other conditions determine whether the lines are bright or dark (whether light is absorbed or emitted), but the wavelengths of the lines for any element are the same in either case. it is the precise pattern of wavelengths that makes the signature of each element unique. liquids and solids can also generate spectral lines or bands, but they are broader and less well defined—and hence, more difficult to interpret. spectral analysis, however, can be quite useful. it can, for example, be applied to light reflected off the surface of a nearby asteroid as well as to light from a distant galaxy. the dark lines in the solar spectrum thus give evidence of certain chemical elements between us and the sun absorbing those wavelengths of sunlight. because the space between us and the sun is pretty empty, astronomers realized that the atoms doing the absorbing must be in a thin atmosphere of cooler gas around the sun. this outer atmosphere is not all that different from the rest of the sun, just thinner and cooler. thus, we can use what we learn about its composition as an indicator of what the whole sun is made of. similarly, we can use the presence of absorption and emission lines to analyze the composition of other stars and clouds of gas in space. such analysis of spectra is the key to modern astronomy.
only in this way can we “sample” the stars, which are too far away for us to visit. encoded in the electromagnetic radiation from celestial objects is clear information about the chemical makeup of these objects. only by understanding what the stars were made of could astronomers begin to form theories about what made them shine and how they evolved. in 1860, german physicist gustav kirchhoff became the first person to use spectroscopy to identify an element in the sun when he found the spectral signature of sodium gas. in the years that followed, astronomers found many other chemical elements in the sun and stars. in fact, the element helium was found first in the sun from its spectrum and only later identified on earth. (the word “helium” comes from helios, the greek name for the sun.) why are there specific lines for each element? the answer to that question was not found until the twentieth century; it required the development of a model for the atom. we therefore turn next to a closer examination of the atoms that make up all matter.
you can use the spectrum constructor (https://openstax.org/l/30spectcoord) to explore the three types of spectra and how they appear through a diffraction grating when the brightness of each wavelength is measured with a spectrometer. the rainbow rainbows are an excellent illustration of the dispersion of sunlight. you have a good chance of seeing a rainbow any time you are between the sun and a rain shower, as illustrated in figure 5.13. the raindrops act like little prisms and break white light into the spectrum of colors. suppose a ray of sunlight encounters a raindrop and passes into it. the light changes direction—is refracted—when it passes from air to water; the link to learning making connections 5.3 • spectroscopy in astronomy 159 blue and violet light are refracted more than the red. some of the light is then reflected at the backside of the drop and reemerges from the front, where it is again refracted. as a result, the white light is spread out into a rainbow of colors. figure 5.13 rainbow refraction.
(a) this diagram shows how light from the sun, which is located behind the observer, can be refracted by raindrops to produce (b) a rainbow. (c) refraction separates white light into its component colors. note that violet light lies above the red light after it emerges from the raindrop. when you look at a rainbow, however, the red light is higher in the sky. why? look again at figure 5.13. if the observer looks at a raindrop that is high in the sky, the violet light passes over her head and the red light enters her eye. similarly, if the observer looks at a raindrop that is low in the sky, the violet light reaches her eye and the drop appears violet, whereas the red light from that same drop strikes the ground and is not seen. colors of intermediate wavelengths are refracted to the eye by drops that are intermediate in altitude between the drops that appear violet and the ones that appear red. thus, a single rainbow always has red on the outside and violet on the inside. 5.4 the structure of the atom learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the idea that matter is composed of tiny particles called atoms is at least 25 centuries old.