it may, of course, survive its initial passage near the sun and return to the cold reaches of space where it spent the previous 4.5 billion years. at the other extreme, it may collide with the sun or come so close that it is destroyed on its first perihelion passage (several such collisions have been observed with space telescopes that monitor the sun). sometimes, however, the new comet does not come that close to the sun but instead interacts with one or more of the planets. soho (the solar and heliospheric observatory) has an excellent collection of videos of comets (https://openstax.org/l/30sohocomvid) that come near the sun. at this site, comet ison approaches the sun and is believed to be destroyed in its passage. a comet that comes within the gravitational influence of a planet has three possible fates. it can (1) impact the planet, ending the story at once; (2) speed up and be ejected, leaving the solar system forever; or (3) be perturbed into an orbit with a shorter period. in the last case, its fate is sealed.
each time it approaches the sun, it loses part of its material and also has a significant chance of collision with a planet. once the comet is in this kind of short-period orbit, its lifetime starts being measured in thousands, not billions, of years. a few comets end their lives catastrophically by breaking apart (sometimes for no apparent reason) (figure 13.29). especially spectacular was the fate of the faint comet shoemaker-levy 9, which broke into about 20 pieces when it passed close to jupiter in july 1992. the fragments of shoemaker-levy were actually captured into a very elongated, two-year orbit around jupiter, more than doubling the number of known jovian moons. this was only a temporary enrichment of jupiter’s family, however, because in july 1994, all the comet fragments crashed unto jupiter, releasing energy equivalent to millions of megatons of tnt. link to learning 464 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page482_img1.jpeg] figure 13.29 breakup of comet linear.
(a) a ground-based view with much less detail and (b) a much more detailed photo with the hubble space telescope, showing the multiple fragments of the nucleus of comet linear. the comet disintegrated in july 2000 for no apparent reason. (note in the left view, the fragments all blend their light together, and can’t be distinguished. the short diagonal white lines are stars that move in the image, which is keeping track of the moving comet.) (credit a: modification of work by the university of hawaii; credit b: modification of work by nasa, harold weaver (the johns hopkins university), and the hst comet linear investigation team) as each cometary fragment streaked into the jovian atmosphere at a speed of 60 kilometers per second, it disintegrated and exploded, producing a hot fireball that carried the comet dust as well as atmospheric gases to high altitudes. these fireballs were clearly visible in profile, with the actual point of impact just beyond the jovian horizon as viewed from earth (figure 13.30).
as each explosive plume fell back into jupiter, a region of the upper atmosphere larger than earth was heated to incandescence and glowed brilliantly for about 15 minutes, a glow we could detect with infrared-sensitive telescopes. figure 13.30 comet impact on jupiter. (a) the “string” of white objects are fragments of comet shoemaker-levy 9 approaching jupiter. (b) the first fragment of the comet impacts jupiter, with the point of contact on the bottom left side in this image. on the right is jupiter’s moon, io. the equally bright spot in the top image is the comet fragment flaring to maximum brightness. the bottom image, taken about 20 minutes later, shows the lingering flare from the impact. the great red spot is visible near the center of jupiter. these infrared images were taken with a german-spanish telescope on calar alto in southern spain.