you may also sometimes hear this field link to learning describe the chemical building blocks required for life describe the molecular systems and processes driving the origin and evolution of life describe the characteristics of a habitable environment describe some of the extreme conditions on earth, and explain how certain organisms have adapted to these conditions 1058 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org referred to as exobiology or bioastronomy. astrobiology brings together astronomers, planetary scientists, chemists, geologists, and biologists (among others) to work on the same problems from their various perspectives. among the issues that astrobiologists explore are the conditions in which life arose on earth and the reasons for the extraordinary adaptability of life on our planet. they are also involved in identifying habitable worlds beyond earth and in trying to understand in practical terms how to look for life on those worlds. let’s look at some of these issues in more detail. the building blocks of life while no unambiguous evidence for life has yet been found anywhere beyond earth, life’s chemical building blocks have been detected in a wide range of extraterrestrial environments.
meteorites (which you learned about in cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system) have been found to contain two kinds of substances whose chemical structures mark them as having an extraterrestrial origin—amino acids and sugars. amino acids are organic compounds that are the molecular building blocks of proteins. proteins are key biological molecules that provide the structure and function of the body’s tissues and organs and essentially carry out the “work” of the cell. when we examine the gas and dust around comets, we also find a number of organic molecules—compounds that on earth are associated with the chemistry of life. expanding beyond our solar system, one of the most interesting results of modern radio astronomy has been the discovery of organic molecules in giant clouds of gas and dust between stars. more than 100 different molecules have been identified in these reservoirs of cosmic raw material, including formaldehyde, alcohol, and others we know as important stepping stones in the development of life on earth. using radio telescopes and radio spectrometers, astronomers can measure the abundances of various chemicals in these clouds.
we find organic molecules most readily in regions where the interstellar dust is most abundant, and it turns out these are precisely the regions where star formation (and probably planet formation) happen most easily (figure 30.4). figure 30.4 cloud of gas and dust. this cloud of gas and dust in the constellation of scorpius is the sort of region where complex molecules are found. it is also the sort of cloud where new stars form from the reservoir of gas and dust in the cloud. radiation from a group of hot stars (off the picture to the bottom left) called the scorpius ob association is “eating into” the cloud, sweeping it into an elongated shape and causing the reddish glow seen at its tip. (credit: dr. robert gendler) clearly the early earth itself produced some of the molecular building blocks of life. since the early 1950s, scientists have tried to duplicate in their laboratories the chemical pathways that led to life on our planet.
in a series of experiments known as the miller-urey experiments, pioneered by stanley miller and harold urey at 30.2 • astrobiology 1059 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1077_img1.jpeg] the university of chicago, biochemists have simulated conditions on early earth and have been able to produce some of the fundamental building blocks of life, including those that form proteins and other large biological molecules known as nucleic acids (which we will discuss shortly). although these experiments produced encouraging results, there are some problems with them. the most interesting chemistry from a biological perspective takes place with hydrogen-rich or reducing gases, such as ammonia and methane. however, the early atmosphere of earth was probably dominated by carbon dioxide (as venus’ and mars’ atmospheres still are today) and may not have contained an abundance of reducing gases comparable to that used in miller-urey type experiments. hydrothermal vents—seafloor systems in which ocean water is superheated and circulated through crustal or mantle rocks before reemerging into the ocean—have also been suggested as potential contributors of organic compounds on the early earth, and such sources would not require earth to have an early reducing atmosphere.