the best documented changes in earth’s climate are the great ice ages, which have lowered the temperature of the northern hemisphere periodically over the past half million years or so (figure 8.14). the last ice age, which ended about 14,000 years ago, lasted some 20,000 years. at its height, the ice was almost 2 kilometers thick over boston and stretched as far south as new york city. 270 8 • earth as a planet access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page288_img1.jpeg] figure 8.14 ice age. this computer-generated image shows the frozen areas of the northern hemisphere during past ice ages from the vantage point of looking down on the north pole. the area in black indicates the most recent glaciation (coverage by glaciers), and the area in gray shows the maximum level of glaciation ever reached. (credit: modification of work by hannes grobe/awi) these ice ages were primarily the result of changes in the tilt of earth’s rotational axis, produced by the gravitational effects of the other planets.
we are less certain about evidence that at least once (and perhaps twice) about a billion years ago, the entire ocean froze over, a situation called snowball earth. the development and evolution of life on earth has also produced changes in the composition and temperature of our planet’s atmosphere, as we shall see in the next section. 8.4 life, chemical evolution, and climate change learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: as far as we know, earth seems to be the only planet in the solar system with life. the origin and development of life are an important part of our planet’s story. life arose early in earth’s history, and living organisms have been interacting with their environment for billions of years. we recognize that life-forms have evolved to adapt to the environment on earth, and we are now beginning to realize that earth itself has been changed in important ways by the presence of living matter. the study of the coevolution of life and our planet is one of the subjects of the modern science of astrobiology.
outline the origins and subsequent diversity of life on earth explain the ways that life and geological activity have influenced the evolution of the atmosphere describe the causes and effects of the atmospheric greenhouse effect and global warming describe the impact of human activity on our planet’s atmosphere and ecology 8.4 • life, chemical evolution, and climate change 271 [image: astronomy_openstax_page289_img1.jpeg] the origin of life the record of the birth of life on earth has been lost in the restless motions of the crust. according to chemical evidence, by the time the oldest surviving rocks were formed about 3.9 billion years ago, life already existed. at 3.5 billion years ago, life had achieved the sophistication to build large colonies called stromatolites, a form so successful that stromatolites still grow on earth today (figure 8.15). but, few rocks survive from these ancient times, and abundant fossils have been preserved only during the past 600 million years—less than 15% of our planet’s history. figure 8.15 cross-sections of fossil stromatolites. this polished cross-section of a fossilized colony of stromatolites dates to the precambrian era.
the layered, domelike structures are mats of sediment trapped in shallow waters by large numbers of blue-green bacteria that can photosynthesize. such colonies of microorganisms date back more than 3 billion years. (credit: james st. john) there is little direct evidence about the actual origin of life. we know that the atmosphere of early earth, unlike today’s, contained abundant carbon dioxide and some methane, but no oxygen gas. in the absence of oxygen, many complex chemical reactions are possible that lead to the production of amino acids, proteins, and other chemical building blocks of life. therefore, it seems likely that these chemical building blocks were available very early in earth’s history and they would have combined to make living organisms. for tens of millions of years after earth’s formation, life (perhaps little more than large molecules, like the viruses of today) probably existed in warm, nutrient-rich seas, living off accumulated organic chemicals. when this easily accessible food became depleted, life began the long evolutionary road that led to the vast numbers of different organisms on earth today. as it did so, life began to influence the chemical composition of the atmosphere.