reach (ssc/caltech); march: modification of work by esa, hubble and nasa, acknowledgement: giles chapdelaine; april: modification of work by nasa, esa, cfht, cxo, m.j. jee (university of california, davis), a. mahdavi (san francisco state university); may: modification of work by nasa, jpl-caltech; june: modification of work by nasa/esa; july: modification of work by nasa, jpl-caltech, harvard-smithsonian; august: modification of work by nasa, jpl-caltech, r. hurt (ssc-caltech); september: modification of work by nasa; october: modification of work by nasa; november: modification of work by dénes emőke) where does the origin of human beings fall during the course of this cosmic year? the answer turns out to be the evening of december 31. the invention of the alphabet doesn’t occur until the fiftieth second of 11:59 p.m. on december 31. and the beginnings of modern astronomy are a mere fraction of a second before the new year.
seen in a cosmic context, the amount of time we have had to study the stars is minute, and our success in piecing together as much of the story as we have is remarkable. certainly our attempts to understand the universe are not complete. as new technologies and new ideas allow us to gather more and better data about the cosmos, our present picture of astronomy will very likely undergo many changes. still, as you read our current progress report on the exploration of the universe, take a few minutes every once in a while just to savor how much you have already learned. 1.9 • a conclusion and a beginning 29 [image: astronomy_openstax_page47_img1.jpeg] for further exploration articles bakich, m., et al. “101 cosmic objects you must see.” astronomy (january 2022): 6. talcott, r. “30 years of hubble’s greatest hits.” astronomy (march 2020): 18. books miller, ron, and william hartmann. the grand tour: a traveler’s guide to the solar system. 3rd ed. workman, 2005. this volume for beginners is a colorfully illustrated voyage among the planets. sagan, carl.
cosmos. ballantine, 2013 [1980]. this tome presents a classic overview of astronomy by an astronomer who had a true gift for explaining things clearly. (you can also check out sagan’s television series cosmos: a personal voyage and neil degrasse tyson’s current series cosmos: a spacetime odyssey.) tyson, neil degrasse, and don goldsmith. origins: fourteen billion years of cosmic evolution. norton, 2004. this book provides a guided tour through the beginnings of the universe, galaxies, stars, planets, and life. websites if you enjoyed the beautiful images in this chapter (and there are many more fabulous photos to come in other chapters), you may want to know where you can obtain and download such pictures for your own enjoyment. (many astronomy images are from government-supported instruments or projects, paid for by tax dollars, and therefore are free of copyright laws.) here are three resources we especially like: • astronomy picture of the day: apod.nasa.gov/apod/astropix.html (https://apod.nasa.gov/apod/ astropix.html). two space scientists scour the internet and select one beautiful astronomy image to feature each day.
their archives range widely, from images of planets and nebulae to rockets and space instruments; they also have many photos of the night sky. the search function (see the menu on the bottom of the page) works quite well for finding something specific among the many years’ worth of daily images. • hubble space telescope images: https://www.spacetelescope.org/images/ (https://www.spacetelescope.org/images/) or james webb space telescope images: https://esawebb.org/ images (https://esawebb.org/images). here you can browse some of the remarkable images from these two space telescopes, select a particular subject in the menu boxes, or search for the name of an object that intrigues you in this book. • national aeronautics and space administration’s (nasa’s) planetary photojournal: photojournal.jpl.nasa.gov (https://photojournal.jpl.nasa.gov). this site features thousands of images from nasa planetary exploration, with captions of varied length. you can select images by world, feature name, date, or catalog number, and download images in a number of popular formats. use the photojournal search option on the menu at the top of the homepage to access ways to search their archives.