note that pluto, indicated by an arrow, has moved among the stars during those six nights. if we hadn’t put an arrow next to it, though, you probably would never have spotted the dot that moved. (credit: modification of work by the lowell observatory archives) although the discovery of pluto appeared initially to be a vindication of gravitational theory similar to the earlier triumph of adams and le verrier in predicting the position of neptune, we now know that lowell’s calculations were wrong. when its mass and size were finally measured, it was found that pluto could not possibly have exerted any measurable pull on either uranus or neptune. astronomers are now convinced that the reported small anomalies in the motions of uranus are not, and never were, real. from the time of its discovery, it was clear that pluto was not a giant like the other four outer solar system planets. for a long time, it was thought that the mass of pluto was similar to that of earth, so that it was classed as a fifth terrestrial planet, somehow misplaced in the far outer reaches of the solar system.
there were other anomalies, however, as pluto’s orbit was more eccentric and inclined to the plane of our solar system than that of any other planet. only after the discovery of its moon charon in 1978 could the mass of pluto be measured, and it turned out to be far less than the mass of earth. in addition to charon, pluto has four much smaller moons. subsequent observations of charon showed that this moon is in a retrograde orbit and has a diameter of about 1200 kilometers, more than half the size of pluto itself (figure 12.18). this makes charon the moon whose size is the largest fraction of its parent planet. we could even think of pluto and charon as a double world. seen from pluto, charon would be as large as eight full moons on earth. 410 12 • rings, moons, and pluto access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page428_img1.jpeg] figure 12.18 comparison of the sizes of pluto and its moon charon with earth. this graphic vividly shows how tiny pluto is relative to a terrestrial planet like earth.
that is the primary justification for putting pluto in the class of dwarf planets rather than terrestrial planets. (credit: modification of work by nasa) to many astronomers, pluto seemed like the odd cousin that everyone hopes will not show up at the next family reunion. neither its path around the sun nor its size resembles either the giant planets or the terrestrial planets. in the 1990s, astronomers began to discover additional small objects in the far outer solar system, showing that pluto was not unique. we will discuss these trans-neptunian objects later with other small bodies, in the chapter on comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system. one of them (called eris) is nearly the same size as pluto, and another (makemake) is substantially smaller. it became clear to astronomers that pluto was so different from the other planets that it needed a new classification. therefore, it was called a dwarf planet, meaning a planet much smaller than the terrestrial planets. we now know of many small objects in the vicinity of pluto and we have classified several as dwarf planets. a similar history was associated with the discovery of the asteroids.
when the first asteroid (ceres) was discovered at the beginning of the nineteenth century, it was hailed as a new planet. in the following years, however, other objects were found with similar orbits to ceres. astronomers decided that these should not all be considered planets, so they invented a new class of objects, called minor planets or asteroids. today, ceres is also called a dwarf planet. both minor planets and dwarf planets are part of a whole belt or zones of similar objects (as we will discuss in comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system). so, is pluto a planet? our answer is yes, but it is a dwarf planet, clearly not in the same league with the eight major planets (four giants and four terrestrials). while some people were upset when pluto was reclassified, we might point out that a dwarf tree is still a type of tree and (as we shall see) a dwarf galaxy is still a type of galaxy. clyde tombaugh: from the farm to fame clyde tombaugh discovered pluto when he was 24 years old, and his position as staff assistant at the lowell observatory was his first paying job.