margaret geller, the late john huchra, and their students at the harvard-smithsonian center for astrophysics pioneered this technique, and several other groups have extended their work to cover larger volumes of space. margaret geller: cosmic surveyor born in 1947, margaret geller is the daughter of a chemist who encouraged her interest in science and helped her visualize the three-dimensional structure of molecules as a child. (it was a skill that would later come in very handy for visualizing the three-dimensional structure of the universe.) she remembers being bored in elementary school, but she was encouraged to read on her own by her parents. her recollections also include subtle messages from teachers that mathematics (her strong early interest) was not a field for girls, but she did not allow herself to be deterred. geller obtained a ba in physics from the university of california at berkeley and became the second woman to receive a phd in physics from princeton. there, while working with james peebles, one of the world’s leading cosmologists, she became interested in problems relating to the large-scale structure of the universe.
in 1980, she accepted a research position at the harvard-smithsonian center for astrophysics, one of the nation’s most dynamic institutions for astronomy research. she saw that to make progress in understanding how galaxies and clusters are organized, a far more intensive series of surveys was required. although it would not bear fruit for many years, geller and her collaborators began the long, arduous task of mapping the galaxies (figure 28.20). voyagers in astronomy 978 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org figure 28.20 margaret geller. geller’s work mapping and researching galaxies has helped us to better understand the structure of the universe. (credit: modification of work by massimo ramella) her team was fortunate to be given access to a telescope that could be dedicated to their project, the 60-inch reflector on mount hopkins, near tucson, arizona, where they and their assistants took spectra to determine galaxy distances. to get a slice of the universe, they pointed their telescope at a predetermined position in the sky and then let the rotation of earth bring new galaxies into their field of view.
in this way, they measured the positions and redshifts of over 18,000 galaxies and made a wide range of interesting maps to display their data. their surveys now include “slices” in both the northern and southern hemispheres. as news of her important work spread beyond the community of astronomers, geller received a macarthur foundation fellowship in 1990. these fellowships, popularly called “genius awards,” are designed to recognize truly creative work in a wide range of fields. geller continues to have a strong interest in visualization and has (with filmmaker boyd estus) made several award-winning videos explaining her work to nonscientists (one is titled so many galaxies . . . so little time). she has appeared on a variety of national news and documentary programs, including the macneil/lehrer newshour, the astronomers, and the infinite voyage. energetic and outspoken, she has given talks on her work to many audiences around the country, and works hard to find ways to explain the significance of her pioneering surveys to the public. “it’s exciting to discover something that nobody’s seen before.
[to be] one of the first three people to ever see that slice of the universe [was] sort of being like columbus. . . . nobody expected such a striking pattern!”—margaret geller find out more about geller and huchra’s work (including interviews with geller) in this 4-minute nova (https://openstax.org/l/30gellhucwork) video. you can also learn more about their conclusions (https://openstax.org/l/30gellhucconc) and additional research it led to. the largest universe mapping project to date is the sloan digital sky survey (see the making connections feature box astronomy and technology: the sloan digital sky survey at the end of this section). a plot of the distribution of galaxies mapped by the sloan survey is shown in figure 28.21. to the surprise of astronomers, maps like the one in the figure showed that clusters of galaxies are not arranged uniformly throughout the universe, but are found in huge filamentary superclusters that look like great arcs of inkblots splattered link to learning 28.3 • the distribution of galaxies in space 979 [image: astronomy_openstax_page997_img1.jpeg] across a page.