two kinds of geological features appear to be remnants of ancient watercourses, while a third class—smaller gullies—suggests intermittent outbreaks of liquid water even today. we will examine each of these features in turn. in the highland equatorial plains, there are multitudes of small, sinuous (twisting) channels—typically a few meters deep, some tens of meters wide, and perhaps 10 or 20 kilometers long (figure 10.27). they are called runoff channels because they look like what geologists would expect from the surface runoff of ancient rain storms. these runoff channels seem to be telling us that the planet had a very different climate long ago. to estimate the age of these channels, we look at the cratering record. crater counts show that this part of the planet is more cratered than the lunar maria but less cratered than the lunar highlands. thus, the runoff channels are probably older than the lunar maria, presumably about 4 billion years old. the second set of water-related features we see are outflow channels (figure 10.27) are much larger than the runoff channels.
the largest of these, which drain into the chryse basin where pathfinder landed, are 10 kilometers or more wide and hundreds of kilometers long. many features of these outflow channels have convinced geologists that they were carved by huge volumes of running water, far too great to be produced by ordinary rainfall. where could such floodwater have come from on mars? figure 10.27 runoff and outflow channels. (a) these runoff channels in the old martian highlands are interpreted as the valleys of ancient rivers fed by either rain or underground springs. the width of this image is about 200 kilometers. (b) this intriguing channel, called nanedi valles, resembles earth riverbeds in some (but not all) ways. the tight curves and terraces seen in the channel certainly suggest the sustained flow of a fluid like water. the channel is about 2.5 kilometers across. (credit a: modification of work by jim secosky/nasa; credit b: modification of work by jim secosky/nasa) as far we can tell, the regions where the outflow channels originate contained abundant water frozen in the soil as permafrost.
some local source of heating must have released this water, leading to a period of rapid and catastrophic flooding. perhaps this heating was associated with the formation of the volcanic plains on mars, which date back to roughly the same time as the outflow channels. note that neither the runoff channels nor the outflow channels are wide enough to be visible from earth, nor do they follow straight lines. they could not have been the “canals” percival lowell imagined seeing on the red planet. the third type of water feature, the smaller gullies, was discovered by the mars global surveyor (figure 10.28). 348 10 • earthlike planets: venus and mars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page366_img1.jpeg] the mars global surveyor’s camera images achieved a resolution of a few meters, good enough to see something as small as a truck or bus on the surface. on the steep walls of valleys and craters at high latitudes, there are many erosional features that look like gullies carved by flowing water.
these gullies are very young: not only are there no superimposed impact craters, but in some instances, the gullies seem to cut across recent wind-deposited dunes. perhaps there is liquid water underground that can occasionally break out to produce short-lived surface flows before the water can freeze or evaporate. figure 10.28 gullies on the wall of garni crater. this high-resolution image is from the mars reconnaissance orbiter. the dark streaks, which are each several hundred meters long, change in a seasonal pattern that suggests they are caused by the temporary flow of surface water. (credit: nasa/jpl-caltech/university of arizona) the gullies also have the remarkable property of changing regularly with the martian seasons. many of the dark streaks (visible in figure 10.28) elongate within a period of a few days, indicating that something is flowing downhill—either water or dark sediment.