they include: star constellation altair aquila the eagle capella auriga the charioteer arcturus bootes the herdsman sirius canis major the big dog procyon canis minor the little dog alpha centauri centauri the centaur castor gemini the twins pollux gemini the twins denebola leo the lion vega lyra the harp fomalhaut pisces austrinus the southern fish aldebaran taurus the bull astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 290 table 40: stars by mass mass population (m☉) % < 0.25 41% 0.25 to 0.5 28% 0.5 to 1 19% 1 to 2 8% 2 to 4 3% 4 to 8 0.8% 8 to 20 0.3% > 20 0.06% most stars are red dwarfs component 123 – stellar distributions there are many more low mass stars than there are high mass stars. there are two reasons for this difference: 1.
as stars form from a dust cloud, fragmentation would need to stop early enough to leave fragments that are massive enough to form the blue dwarf stars. 2. larger stars have shorter lives than smaller stars. all of the red dwarfs that ever formed still exist as red dwarfs. there has not been enough time for them to use up their fuel and to become white dwarf remnants. blue dwarfs live relatively short lives. within a few hundred million years a blue dwarf will have created iron in its core and became a neutron star or black hole as a result of a supernova explosion. looking at the data in table 40, it is apparent that 88% of the stars in the galaxy are smaller than the sun. most stars are red dwarfs. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 291 the sun is a population i star we have never seen a population iii star component 124 – stellar populations in the 1940s, astronomers began studying stars in the galactic halo. they observed that there were far fewer heavy metals (anything heavier than helium) in the stars in the halo than there were in the stellar neighborhood and in the rest of the galactic disk. they termed the disk stars with high metallicity as population i.
those stars of the halo, with less metallicity, were termed population ii stars. population i stars the current generation of stars is formed from dust clouds that have been seeded with heavy elements from prior supernovae explosions. these stars have a larger amount of heavy metals in their spectra. the sun is a population i star. population ii stars in the halo are older stars. these stars show some metallicity but it is significantly less than the stars in the disk, the population i stars. these stars also formed from a dust cloud with elements from prior supernovae explosions, but the lower concentrations of heavy elements means the clouds had fewer prior supernova. but these population ii stars have too high a concentration of heavy metals to have been formed from the primordial dust cloud. population iii stars although none have been seen, there is a theory that there should be another population of stars, population iii, those that formed from the primordial dust cloud. this dust cloud would have been formed from the materials of the big bang. this would have been hydrogen and helium, with only trace amounts of lithium and beryllium. the leading theory of why we have not seen any population iii stars is that stars made of only hydrogen and helium would be very large stars.
they would likely have been between 60 and 300 solar masses, and they would have formed in the very early universe. very massive stars live relatively short lives in the range of 10s to 100s of millions of years. any population iii stars that formed would have long since reached the end of their lives and today would be neutron stars or black holes. to see these stars from the early universe, our telescopes would need to be able to see individual stars that are over 13 billion light-years away. this would be quite a feat, and we may never be able to see population iii stars. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 292 interstellar dust is the shape of rice interstellar gas is composed of hydrogen and helium component 125 – interstellar dust and gas when we look at galaxies or within our own galaxy we see that there are great expanses of dust and gas. these clouds are matter that is not currently in stars or other objects. it is mostly hydrogen and helium, but does have heavy elements as well. the gas is composed of atoms and molecules and is not very dense. the dust is more like smoke. it contains many different molecules and atoms that have collected together.