how would you approach this meeting? assuming that the members of the city council do not have much science background, how would you explain the importance of the project to them? suggest some visual aids you could use. e. when raymond davis first suggested his experiment in the underground gold mine, which had significant costs associated with it, some people said it wasn’t worth the expense since we already understood the conditions and reactions in the core of the sun. yet his experiment led to a major change in our understanding of neutrinos and the physics of subatomic particles. can your group think of other “expensive” experiments in astronomy that led to fundamental improvements in our understanding of nature? exercises review questions 1. how do we know the age of the sun? 2. explain how we know that the sun’s energy is not supplied either by chemical burning, as in fires here on earth, or by gravitational contraction (shrinking). 3. what is the ultimate source of energy that makes the sun shine? 4. what are the formulas for the three steps in the proton-proton chain? 5. how is a neutrino different from a neutron? list all the ways you can think of. 6.
describe in your own words what is meant by the statement that the sun is in hydrostatic equilibrium. 7. two astronomy students travel to south dakota. one stands on earth’s surface and enjoys some sunshine. at the same time, the other descends into a gold mine where neutrinos are detected, arriving in time to detect the creation of a new radioactive argon nucleus. although the photon at the surface and the neutrinos in the mine arrive at the same time, they have had very different histories. describe the differences. 8. what do measurements of the number of neutrinos emitted by the sun tell us about conditions deep in the solar interior? 9. do neutrinos have mass? describe how the answer to this question has changed over time and why. 10. neutrinos produced in the core of the sun carry energy to its exterior. is the mechanism for this energy transport conduction, convection, or radiation? 16 • exercises 569 11. what conditions are required before proton-proton chain fusion can start in the sun? 12. describe the two main ways that energy travels through the sun. thought questions 13.
someone suggests that astronomers build a special gamma-ray detector to detect gamma rays produced during the proton-proton chain in the core of the sun, just like they built a neutrino detector. explain why this would be a fruitless effort. 14. earth contains radioactive elements whose decay produces neutrinos. how might we use neutrinos to determine how these elements are distributed in earth’s interior? 15. the sun is much larger and more massive than earth. do you think the average density of the sun is larger or smaller than that of earth? write down your answer before you look up the densities. now find the values of the densities elsewhere in this text. were you right? explain clearly the meanings of density and mass. 16. a friend who has not had the benefit of an astronomy course suggests that the sun must be full of burning coal to shine as brightly as it does. list as many arguments as you can against this hypothesis. 17. which of the following transformations is (are) fusion and which is (are) fission: helium to carbon, carbon to iron, uranium to lead, boron to carbon, oxygen to neon? (see appendix k for a list of the elements.) 18.
why is a higher temperature required to fuse hydrogen to helium by means of the cno cycle than is required by the process that occurs in the sun, which involves only isotopes of hydrogen and helium? 19. earth’s atmosphere is in hydrostatic equilibrium. what this means is that the pressure at any point in the atmosphere must be high enough to support the weight of air above it. how would you expect the pressure on mt. everest to differ from the pressure in your classroom? explain why. 20. explain what it means when we say that earth’s oceans are in hydrostatic equilibrium. now suppose you are a scuba diver. would you expect the pressure to increase or decrease as you dive below the surface to a depth of 200 feet? why? 21. what mechanism transfers heat away from the surface of the moon? if the moon is losing energy in this way, why does it not simply become colder and colder? 22. suppose you are standing a few feet away from a bonfire on a cold fall evening. your face begins to feel hot. what is the mechanism that transfers heat from the fire to your face? (hint: is the air between you and the fire hotter or cooler than your face?) 23.