we will also examine the newest satellites that are surveying the night sky and discuss the special types of stars that can be used as trail markers to distant galaxies. celestial distances 19 [image: astronomy_openstax_page655_img1.jpeg] 19.1 fundamental units of distance learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the first measures of distances were based on human dimensions—the inch as the distance between knuckles on the finger, or the yard as the span from the extended index finger to the nose of the british king. later, the requirements of commerce led to some standardization of such units, but each nation tended to set up its own definitions. it was not until the middle of the eighteenth century that any real efforts were made to establish a uniform, international set of standards. the metric system one of the enduring legacies of the era of the french emperor napoleon is the establishment of the metric system of units, officially adopted in france in 1799 and now used in most countries around the world. the fundamental metric unit of length is the meter, originally defined as one ten-millionth of the distance along earth’s surface from the equator to the pole.
french astronomers of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were pioneers in determining the dimensions of earth, so it was logical to use their information as the foundation of the new system. practical problems exist with a definition expressed in terms of the size of earth, since anyone wishing to determine the distance from one place to another can hardly be expected to go out and re-measure the planet. therefore, an intermediate standard meter consisting of a bar of platinum-iridium metal was set up in paris. in 1889, by international agreement, this bar was defined to be exactly one meter in length, and precise copies of the original meter bar were made to serve as standards for other nations. other units of length are derived from the meter. thus, 1 kilometer (km) equals 1000 meters, 1 centimeter (cm) equals 1/100 meter, and so on. even the old british and american units, such as the inch and the mile, are now defined in terms of the metric system. modern redefinitions of the meter in 1960, the official definition of the meter was changed again.
as a result of improved technology for generating spectral lines of precisely known wavelengths (see the chapter on radiation and spectra), the meter was redefined to equal 1,650,763.73 wavelengths of a particular atomic transition in the element krypton-86. the advantage of this redefinition is that anyone with a suitably equipped laboratory can reproduce a standard meter, without reference to any particular metal bar. in 1983, the meter was defined once more, this time in terms of the velocity of light. light in a vacuum can travel a distance of one meter in 1/299,792,458 second. today, therefore, light travel time provides our basic unit of length. put another way, a distance of one light-second (the amount of space light covers in one second) is defined to be 299,792,458 meters. that’s almost 300 million meters that light covers in just one second; light really is very fast! we could just as well use the light-second as the fundamental unit of length, but for practical reasons (and to respect tradition), we have defined the meter as a small fraction of the light- second.
distance within the solar system the work of copernicus and kepler established the relative distances of the planets—that is, how far from the sun one planet is compared to another (see observing the sky: the birth of astronomy and orbits and gravity). but their work could not establish the absolute distances (in light-seconds or meters or other understand the importance of defining a standard distance unit explain how the meter was originally defined and how it has changed over time discuss how radar is used to measure distances to the other members of the solar system 638 19 • celestial distances access for free at openstax.org standard units of length). this is like knowing the height of all the students in your class only as compared to the height of your astronomy instructor, but not in inches or centimeters. somebody’s height has to be measured directly. similarly, to establish absolute distances, astronomers had to measure one distance in the solar system directly. generally, the closer to us the object is, the easier such a measurement would be.