in addition, it would be very expensive for an extraterrestrial civilization to broadcast on a huge number of channels. most likely, they select one or a few channels for their particular message. communicating on a narrow band of channels also helps distinguish an artificial message from the radio static that comes from natural cosmic processes. but the radio band contains an astronomically large number of possible channels. how can we know in advance which one they have selected, and how they have coded their message into the signal? table 30.1 summarizes these and other factors that scientists must grapple with when trying to tune in to radio messages from distant civilizations. because their success depends on either guessing right about so many factors or searching through all the possibilities for each factor, some scientists have compared their quest to looking for a needle in a haystack. thus, they like to say that the list of factors in table 30.1 defines the cosmic haystack problem. the cosmic haystack problem: some questions about an extraterrestrial message factors from which direction (which star) is the message coming? on what channels (or frequencies) is the message being broadcast? how wide in frequency is the channel? how strong is the signal (can our radio telescopes detect it)?
is the signal continuous, or does it shut off at times (as, for example, a lighthouse beam does when it turns away from us)? does the signal drift (change) in frequency because of the changing relative motion of the source and the receiver? how is the message encoded in the signal (how do we decipher it)? can we even recognize a message from a completely alien species? might it take a form we don’t at all expect? table 30.1 radio searches although the cosmic haystack problem seems daunting, many other research problems in astronomy also require a large investment of time, equipment, and patient effort. and, of course, if we don’t search, we’re sure not to find anything. the very first search was conducted by astronomer frank drake in 1960, using the 85-foot antenna at the 30.4 • the search for extraterrestrial intelligence 1079 national radio astronomy observatory (figure 30.19). called project ozma, after the queen of the exotic land of oz in the children’s stories of l. frank baum, his experiment involved looking at about 7200 channels and two nearby stars over a period of 200 hours.
although he found nothing, drake demonstrated that we had the technology to do such a search, and set the stage for the more sophisticated projects that followed. figure 30.19 project ozma and the allen telescope array. (a) this 25th anniversary photo shows some members of the project ozma team standing in front of the 85-foot radio telescope with which the 1960 search for extraterrestrial messages was performed. frank drake is in the back row, second from the right. (b) the allen telescope array in california is made up of 42 small antennas linked together. this system allows simultaneous observations of multiple sources with millions of separate frequency channels. (credit a: modification of work by nrao; credit b: modification of work by colby gutierrez-kraybill) receivers are constantly improving, and the sensitivity of seti programs—seti stands for the search for extraterrestrial intelligence—is advancing rapidly. equally important, modern electronics and software allow simultaneous searches on millions of frequencies (channels). if we can thus cover a broad frequency range, the cosmic haystack problem of guessing the right frequency largely goes away.
one powerful telescope array array of radio telescopes that was built specifically for seti searches is the allen telescope in northern california. (it was funded by an initial contribution by microsoft founder paul allen to the nonprofit seti institute.) other radio telescopes used for such searches have included the giant arecibo radio dish in puerto rico (which, sadly, collapsed due to storm damage in late 2020), the recently completed, and even larger, fast dish in china, and the green bank telescope in west virginia, which is the largest steerable radio telescope in the world. recently, a powerful new data processing system called “cosmic,” has allowed seti scientists to tap into the regularly scheduled observations on the very large array of radio telescopes (which we discussed in radio telescopes) and search the data being acquired for other astronomy projects for possible intelligent signals. in 2015, silicon valley investor and philanthropist yuri milner donated 100 million dollars to the university of california, berkeley, to enhance the seti endeavor for ten years. the project, called breakthrough: listen, is enlisting more telescopes around the world in the search and is developing sophisticated artificial intelligence programs to scour the incoming signals for intelligent messages.