in the sun, for example, we find that most of the hydrogen and helium atoms in its atmosphere are neutral, whereas most of the calcium atoms, as well as many other heavier atoms, are ionized once. the energy levels of an ionized atom are entirely different from those of the same atom when it is neutral. each time an electron is removed from the atom, the energy levels of the ion, and thus the wavelengths of the spectral lines it can produce, change. this helps astronomers differentiate the ions of a given element. ionized hydrogen, having no electron, can produce no absorption lines. 5.6 the doppler effect learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the last two sections introduced you to many new concepts, and we hope that through those, you have seen one major idea emerge. astronomers can learn about the elements in stars and galaxies by decoding the information in their spectral lines. there is a complicating factor in learning how to decode the message of starlight, however. if a star is moving toward or away from us, its lines will be in a slightly different place in the spectrum from where they would be in a star at rest. and most objects in the universe do have some motion relative to the sun.
motion affects waves in 1842, christian doppler first measured the effect of motion on waves by hiring a group of musicians to play on an open railroad car as it was moving along the track. he then applied what he learned to all waves, including light, and pointed out that if a light source is approaching or receding from the observer, the light waves will be, respectively, crowded more closely together or spread out. the general principle, now known as the doppler effect, is illustrated in figure 5.22. explain why the spectral lines of photons we observe from an object will change as a result of the object’s motion toward or away from us describe how we can use the doppler effect to deduce how fast astronomical objects are moving through space 5.6 • the doppler effect 169 figure 5.22 doppler effect. (a) a source, s, makes waves whose numbered crests (1, 2, 3, and 4) wash over a stationary observer. (b) the source s now moves toward observer a and away from observer c. wave crest 1 was emitted when the source was at position s1, crest 2 at position s2, and so forth.
observer a sees waves compressed by this motion and sees a blueshift (if the waves are light). observer c sees the waves stretched out by the motion and sees a redshift. observer b, whose line of sight is perpendicular to the source’s motion, sees no change in the waves (and feels left out). in part (a) of the figure, the light source (s) is at rest with respect to the observer. the source gives off a series of waves, whose crests we have labeled 1, 2, 3, and 4. the light waves spread out evenly in all directions, like the ripples from a splash in a pond. the crests are separated by a distance, λ, where λ is the wavelength. the observer, who happens to be located in the direction of the bottom of the image, sees the light waves coming nice and evenly, one wavelength apart. observers located anywhere else would see the same thing. on the other hand, if the source of light is moving with respect to the observer, as seen in part (b), the situation is more complicated. between the time one crest is emitted and the next one is ready to come out, the source has moved a bit, toward the bottom of the page.
from the point of view of observer a, this motion of the source has decreased the distance between crests—it’s squeezing the crests together, this observer might say. in part (b), we show the situation from the perspective of three observers. the source is seen in four positions, s1, s2, s3, and s4, each corresponding to the emission of one wave crest. to observer a, the waves seem to follow one another more closely, at a decreased wavelength and thus increased frequency. (remember, all light waves travel at the speed of light through empty space, no matter what. this means that motion cannot affect the speed, but only the wavelength and the frequency. as the wavelength decreases, the frequency must increase. if the waves are shorter, more will be able to move by during each second.) the situation is not the same for other observers. let’s look at the situation from the point of view of observer c, located opposite observer a in the figure. for her, the source is moving away from her location. as a result, the waves are not squeezed together but instead are spread out by the motion of the source. the crests arrive with an increased wavelength and decreased frequency.