(a) this cassini image from a september 2006 flyby shows the liquid lakes on titan. their composition is most likely a combination of methane and ethane. (since this is a radar image, the colors are artificially added. the dark blue areas are the smooth surfaces of the liquid lakes, and yellow is the rougher solid terrain around them.) (b) this mosaic of titan’s surface from the cassini-huygens mission shows in detail a high ridge area and many narrow, sinuous erosion channels that appear to be part of a widespread network of “rivers” carved by flowing hydrocarbons. (credit a: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/usgs; credit b; modification of work by nasa/jpl/esa/university of arizona) these discoveries raise the question of whether there could be life on titan. hydrocarbons are fundamental for the formation of the large carbon molecules that are essential to life on our planet. however, the temperature on titan is far too low for liquid water or for many of the chemical processes that are essential to life as we know it.
there remains, though, an intriguing possibility that titan might have developed a different form of low-temperature carbon-based life that could operate with liquid hydrocarbons playing the role of water. the discovery of such “life as we don’t know it” could be even more exciting than finding life like ours on mars. if such a truly alien life is present on titan, its existence would greatly expand our understanding of the nature of life and of habitable environments. nasa has selected a new mission to titan for launch in 2027. called dragonfly, this mission is a drone that will fly in titan’s atmosphere, with emphasis on study of pre-biotic chemistry. other future proposed missions include a balloon operating in the atmosphere and a “boat” floating in one of the titan lakes. the cassini mission scientists and the visual presentation specialists at nasa’s jet propulsion laboratory have put together some nice films from the images taken by cassini and huygens. see, for example, the titan approach (https://openstax.org/l/30titan) and the flyover (https://openstax.org/l/30titan2) of the northern lakes district.
triton and its volcanoes neptune’s largest moon triton (don’t get its name confused with titan) has a diameter of 2720 kilometers and a density of 2.1 g/cm3, indicating that it’s probably composed of about 75% rock mixed with 25% water ice. measurements indicate that triton’s surface has the coldest temperature of any of the worlds our robot representatives have visited. because its reflectivity is so high (about 80%), triton reflects most of the solar link to learning 12.3 • titan and triton 407 [image: astronomy_openstax_page425_img1.jpeg] energy that falls on it, resulting in a surface temperature between 35 and 40 k. the surface material of triton is made of frozen water, nitrogen, methane, and carbon monoxide. methane and nitrogen exist as gas in most of the solar system, but they are frozen at triton’s temperatures. only a small quantity of nitrogen vapor persists to form an atmosphere. although the surface pressure of this atmosphere is only 16 millionths of a bar, this is sufficient to support thin haze or cloud layers.
triton’s surface, like that of many other moons in the outer solar system, reveals a long history of geological evolution (figure 12.15). although some impact craters are found, many regions have been flooded fairly recently by the local version of “lava” (perhaps water or water-ammonia mixtures). there are also mysterious regions of jumbled or mountainous terrain. figure 12.15 neptune’s moon triton. this mosaic of voyager 2 images of triton shows a wide range of surface features. the pinkish area at the bottom is triton’s large southern polar cap. the south pole of triton faces the sun here, and the slight heating effect is driving some of the material northward, where it is colder. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl/usgs) the voyager flyby of triton took place at a time when the moon’s southern pole was tipped toward the sun, allowing this part of the surface to enjoy a period of relative warmth. (remember that “warm” on triton is still outrageously colder than anything we experience on earth.) a polar cap covers much of triton’s southern hemisphere, apparently evaporating along the northern edge.