the details of galaxy collisions are complex, and the process can take hundreds of millions of years. thus, collisions are best simulated on a computer (figure 28.8), where astronomers can calculate the slow interactions of stars, and clouds of gas and dust, via gravity. these calculations show that if the collision is slow, the colliding galaxies may coalesce to form a single galaxy. figure 28.8 computer simulation of a galaxy collision. this computer simulation starts with two spiral galaxies merging and ends with a single elliptical galaxy. the colors show the colors of stars in the system; note the bursts of blue color as copious star formation gets triggered by the interaction. the timescale from start to finish in this sequence is about a billion years. (credit: modification of work by p. jonsson (harvard-smithsonian center for astrophysics), g. novak (princeton university), and t. j.
cox (carnegie observatories)) when two galaxies of equal size are involved in a collision, we call such an interaction a merger (the term 966 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page984_img1.jpeg] applied in the business world to two equal companies that join forces). but small galaxies can also be swallowed by larger ones—a process astronomers have called, with some relish, galactic cannibalism (figure 28.9). figure 28.9 galactic cannibalism. (a) this hubble image shows the eerie silhouette of dark dust clouds against the glowing nucleus of the elliptical galaxy ngc 1316. elliptical galaxies normally contain very little dust. these clouds are probably the remnant of a small companion galaxy that was cannibalized (eaten) by ngc 1316 about 100 million years ago. (b) the highly disturbed galaxy ngc 6240, imaged by hubble space telescope (background image) and chandra x-ray telescope (both insets) is apparently the product of a merger between two gas-rich spiral galaxies.
the x-ray images show that there is not one but two nuclei, both glowing brightly in x- rays and separated by only 4000 light-years. these are likely the locations of two supermassive black holes that inhabited the cores of the two galaxies pre-merger; here they are participating in a kind of “death spiral,” in which the two black holes themselves will merge to become one. (credit a: modification of work by nasa, esa, and the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura); credit b: x-ray: nasa/cxc/mpe/s.komossa et al.; optical: nasa/stsci/r.p.van der marel & j.gerssen) the very large elliptical galaxies we discussed in galaxies probably form by cannibalizing a variety of smaller galaxies in their clusters. these “monster” galaxies frequently possess more than one nucleus and have probably acquired their unusually high luminosities by swallowing nearby galaxies. the multiple nuclei are the remnants of their victims (figure 28.9). many of the large, peculiar galaxies that we observe also owe their chaotic shapes to past interactions. slow collisions and mergers can even transform two or more spiral galaxies into a single elliptical galaxy.
a change in shape is not all that happens when galaxies collide. if either galaxy contains interstellar matter, the collision can compress the gas and trigger an increase in the rate at which stars are being formed—by as much as a factor of 100. astronomers call this abrupt increase in the number of stars being formed a starburst, and the galaxies in which the increase occurs are termed starburst galaxies (figure 28.10). in some interacting galaxies, star formation is so intense that all the available gas is exhausted in only a few million years; the burst of star formation is clearly only a temporary phenomenon. while a starburst is going on, however, the galaxy where it is taking place becomes much brighter and much easier to detect at large distances. 28.2 • galaxy mergers and active galactic nuclei 967 [image: astronomy_openstax_page985_img1.jpeg] figure 28.10 starburst associated with colliding galaxies. (a) three of the galaxies in the small group known as stephan’s quintet are interacting gravitationally with each other (the galaxy at upper left is actually much closer than the other three and is not part of this interaction), resulting in the distorted shapes seen here.