estimates for the hubble constant are actually closer to 21 or 22 kilometers/second per million light-years, which would make the age closer to 14 billion years. but there is still about a 5% uncertainty in the hubble constant, which means the age of the universe estimated in this way is also uncertain by about 5%. to put these uncertainties in perspective, however, you should know that 50 years ago, the uncertainty was a factor of 2. remarkable progress toward pinning down the hubble constant has been made in the last couple of decades. the role of deceleration the hubble time is the right age for the universe only if the expansion rate has been constant throughout the time since the expansion of the universe began. continuing with our end-of-the-semester-party analogy, this is equivalent to assuming that you traveled home from the party at a constant rate, when in fact this may not have been the case. at first, mad about having to leave, you may have driven fast, but then as you calmed down—and thought about police cars on the highway—you may have begun to slow down until you were driving at a more socially acceptable speed (such as 80 kilometers/hour).
in this case, given that you were driving faster at the beginning, the trip home would have taken less than a half-hour. in the same way, in calculating the hubble time, we have assumed that the expansion rate has been constant throughout all of time. it turns out that this is not a good assumption. earlier in their thinking about this, astronomers expected that the rate of expansion should be slowing down. we know that matter creates gravity, whereby all objects pull on all other objects. the mutual attraction between galaxies was expected to slow the expansion as time passed. this means that, if gravity were the only force acting (a big if, as we shall see in the next section), then the rate of expansion must have been faster in the past than it is today. in this case, we would say the universe has been decelerating since the beginning. how much it has decelerated depends on the importance of gravity in slowing the expansion. if the universe were nearly empty, the role of gravity would be minor. then the deceleration would be close to zero, and the universe would have been expanding at a constant rate.
but in a universe with any significant density of matter, the pull of gravity means that the rate of expansion should be slower now than it used to be. if we use the current rate of expansion to estimate how long it took the galaxies to reach their current separations, we will overestimate the age of the universe—just as we may have overestimated the time it took for you to get home from the party. a universal acceleration astronomers spent several decades looking for evidence that the expansion was decelerating, but they were 1008 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org not successful. what they needed were 1) larger telescopes so that they could measure the redshifts of more distant galaxies and 2) a very luminous standard bulb (or standard candle), that is, some astronomical object with known luminosity that produces an enormous amount of energy and can be observed at distances of a billion light-years or more. recall that we discussed standard bulbs in the chapter on galaxies. if we compare how luminous a standard bulb is supposed to be and how dim it actually looks in our telescopes, the difference allows us to calculate its distance.
the redshift of the galaxy such a bulb is in can tell us how fast it is moving in the universe. so we can measure its distance and motion independently. these two requirements were finally met in the 1990s. astronomers showed that supernovae of type ia (see the death of stars), with some corrections based on the shapes of their light curves, are standard bulbs. this type of supernova occurs when a white dwarf accretes enough material from a companion star to exceed the chandrasekhar limit and then collapses and explodes. at the time of maximum brightness, these dramatic supernovae can briefly outshine the galaxies that host them, and hence, they can be observed at very large distances. large 8- to 10-meter telescopes can be used to obtain the spectra needed to measure the redshifts of the host galaxies (figure 29.3). figure 29.3 five supernovae and their host galaxies. the top row shows each galaxy and its supernova (arrow). the bottom row shows the same galaxies either before or after the supernovae exploded. (credit: modification of work by nasa, esa, and a.