from these measurements and kepler’s third law, it is possible to estimate that the disk is orbiting around a central black hole with a mass of 300 million suns. (credit: modification of work by roeland p. van der marel (stsci), frank c. van den bosch (university of washington), nasa) but do we have to accept black holes as the only explanation of what lies at the center of these galaxies? what else could we put in such a small space other than a giant black hole? the alternative is stars. but to explain the masses in the centers of galaxies without a black hole we need to put at least a million stars in a region the size of the solar system. to fit, they would have be only 2 star diameters apart. collisions between stars would happen all the time. and these collisions would lead to mergers of stars, and very soon the one giant star that they form would collapse into a black hole. so there is really no escape: only a black hole can fit so much mass into so small a space.
as we saw earlier, observations now show that all the galaxies with a spherical concentration of stars—either elliptical galaxies or spiral galaxies with nuclear bulges (see the chapter on galaxies)—harbor one of these giant black holes at their centers. among them is our neighbor spiral galaxy, the andromeda galaxy, m31. the masses of these central black holes range from a just under a million up to at least 30 billion times the mass of the sun. several black holes may be even more massive, but the mass estimates have large uncertainties and need verification. we call these black holes “supermassive” to distinguish them from the much smaller black holes that form when some stars die (see the death of stars). so far, the most massive black holes from stars—those detected through gravitational waves detected by ligo—have masses of about 80 solar masses. energy production around a black hole by now, you may be willing to entertain the idea that huge black holes lurk at the centers of active galaxies. but we still need to answer the question of how such a black hole can account for one of the most powerful sources of energy in the universe. as we saw in black holes and curved spacetime, a black hole itself can radiate no energy.
any energy we detect from it must come from material very close to the black hole, but not inside its event horizon. in a galaxy, a central black hole (with its strong gravity) attracts matter—stars, dust, and gas—orbiting in the dense nuclear regions. this matter spirals in toward the spinning black hole and forms an accretion disk of material around it. as the material spirals ever closer to the black hole, it accelerates and becomes compressed, heating up to temperatures of millions of degrees. such hot matter can radiate prodigious amounts of energy as it falls in toward the black hole. to convince yourself that falling into a region with strong gravity can release a great deal of energy, imagine 938 27 • active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page956_img1.jpeg] dropping a printed version of your astronomy textbook out the window of the ground floor of the library. it will land with a thud, and maybe give a surprised pigeon a nasty bump, but the energy released by its fall will not be very great. now take the same book up to the fifteenth floor of a tall building and drop it from there.
for anyone below, astronomy could suddenly become a deadly subject; when the book hits, it does so with a great deal of energy. dropping things from far away into the much stronger gravity of a black hole is much more effective in turning the energy released by infall into other forms of energy. just as the falling book can heat up the air, shake the ground, or produce sound energy that can be heard some distance away, so the energy of material falling toward a black hole can be converted to significant amounts of electromagnetic radiation. what a black hole has to work with is not textbooks but streams of infalling gas. if a dense blob of gas moves through a thin gas at high speed, it heats up as it slows by friction. as it slows down, kinetic (motion) energy is turned into heat energy. just like a spaceship reentering the atmosphere (figure 27.10), gas approaching a black hole heats up and glows where it meets other gas. but this gas, as it approaches the event horizon, reaches speeds of 10% the speed of light and more. it therefore gets far, far hotter than a spaceship, which reaches no more than about 1500 k.