her heart will beat more slowly, her hair will grow more slowly, her antique wristwatch will tick more slowly, and so on. she is not aware of this slowing down because all her readings of time, whether made by her own bodily functions or with mechanical equipment, are measuring the same—slower—time. meanwhile, back on earth, time passes as it always does. our astronaut now emerges from the region of the black hole, her mission of exploration finished, and returns to earth. before leaving, she carefully notes that (according to her timepieces) she spent about 2 weeks around the black hole. she then takes exactly 10 years to return to earth. her calculations tell her that since she was 22 when she left the earth, she will be 42 plus 2 weeks when she returns. so, the year on earth, she figures, should be 2242, and her classmates should now be approaching their midlife crises. but our astronaut should have paid more attention in her astronomy class! because time slowed down near the black hole, much less time passed for her than for the people on earth.
while her clocks measured 2 weeks spent near the black hole, more than 2000 weeks (depending on how close she got) might have passed on earth. that’s equal to 40 years, meaning her classmates will be senior citizens in their 80s when she (a mere 42-year-old) returns. on earth it will be not 2242, but 2282—and she will say that she has arrived in the future. is this scenario real? well, it has a few practical challenges: we don’t think any black holes are close enough for us to reach in 10 years, and we don’t think any spaceship or human can survive near a black hole. but the key point about the slowing down of time is a natural consequence of einstein’s general theory of making connections 844 24 • black holes and curved spacetime access for free at openstax.org relativity, and we saw that its predictions have been confirmed by experiment after experiment. such developments in the understanding of science also become inspiration for science fiction writers. recently, the film interstellar featured the protagonist traveling close to a massive black hole; the resulting delay in his aging relative to his earthbound family is a key part of the plot.
science fiction novels, such as gateway by frederik pohl and a world out of time by larry niven, also make use of the slowing down of time near black holes as major turning points in the story. for a list of science fiction stories based on good astronomy, you can go to http://bit.ly/astronomyscifi (http://bit.ly/ astronomyscifi). a trip into a black hole the fact that scientists cannot see inside black holes has not kept them from trying to calculate what they are like. one of the first things these calculations showed was that the formation of a black hole obliterates nearly all information about the star that collapsed to form it. physicists like to say “black holes have no hair,” meaning that nothing sticks out of a black hole to give us clues about what kind of star produced it or what material has fallen inside. the only information a black hole can reveal about itself is its mass, its spin (rotation), and whether it has any electrical charge. what happens to the collapsing star-core that made the black hole?
our best calculations predict that the material will continue to collapse under its own weight, forming an infinitely squozen point—a place of zero volume and infinite density—to which we give the name singularity. at the singularity, spacetime ceases to exist. the laws of physics as we know them break down. we do not yet have the physical understanding or the mathematical tools to describe the singularity itself, or even if singularities actually occur. from the outside, however, the entire structure of a basic black hole (one that is not rotating) can be described as a singularity surrounded by an event horizon. compared to humans, black holes are really very simple objects. scientists have also calculated what would happen if an astronaut were to fall into a black hole. let’s take up an observing position a long, safe distance away from the event horizon and watch this astronaut fall toward it. at first he falls away from us, moving ever faster, just as though he were approaching any massive star. however, as he nears the event horizon of the black hole, things change. the strong gravitational field around the black hole will make his clocks run more slowly, when seen from our outside perspective.