from the figure you can see that at times the planet moves forward and at other times it moves backward, or retrograde. eudoxus created a set of 4-sphere models for each planet, except for the sun and the moon, which do not exhibit retrograde motion and therefore only need three spheres each. from the existing texts, it seems clear that plato and his school were looking for a mathematical solution, not a mechanical one. each planet in the eudoxan scheme was considered separately. aristotle’s contribution another of plato’s students was aristotle of stagira, in macedon. in addition to serving as the teacher of alexander the great, aristotle’s fame lies in his founding his own school, the lyceum, also in athens, after the death of plato. aristotle’s approach to nature emphasized the real world much more than plato’s idealistic approach. so when he began to deal with the problem of the planets, he sought out solutions that would work mechanically as well as mathematically. he liked what eudoxus had done, but he felt it needed modification if it was going to represent a real system.
in the figure, the solid-line circles represent the eudoxan spheres for two adjacent planets, like jupiter and saturn. so the inner four circles are the eudoxan spheres for jupiter, and the outer four circles represent the eudoxan spheres for saturn. in between – the dotted line circles – are three new spheres introduced by aristotle. these new spheres were introduced to subtract off the motions of the innermost three spheres of saturn so that their motion would not be transmitted inward to the motion of jupiter. only the outermost sphere’s motion of saturn – [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page422_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page422_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 423 the motion for daily 24-hour motion - would be allowed to transfer all the way in to jupiter’s outermost sphere. in similar fashion, all the planets would have additional counter-rotating spheres to subtract off motions of planetary spheres as you work your way all the way in to the innermost spheres for the closet “planet” to the earth, the moon.
all these new spheres were designed, at least in principle, to make it possible to model the cosmos in a working mechanical system. in all, aristotle’s model added up to 55 concentric crystalline spheres rotating around a fixed earth. aristotle’s scheme would become orthodoxy for the next two millennia, because he wrote so extensively on a huge array of topics which were copied by his students and eventually codified in written texts. but there were a few significant mathematical innovations in succeeding centuries that went well beyond the eudoxan approach. and one innovator even put the earth in motion around the sun. aristarchus of samos not much is known about aristarchus, who flourished in alexandria, egypt around 285 bce. only one of his works survives, in which he calculated the ratio of the moon’s distance from earth to that of the sun’s distance from earth. his mathematical reasoning was correct, but the inaccuracies in observational measurements available to him made his final result well off the mark. but aristarchus is best known today for introducing and defending the notion that the earth both rotated once each day, and that the earth revolved around the sun once each year.
we know he got it right; but this model was almost universally rejected in his day. the arguments against the heliocentric (sun-centered) system, and for the geocentric (earth-centered) system, were both cultural and scientific. the heliocentric system violated centuries of tradition. all the cultures of the near-eastern and mediterranean regions were represented in the melting-pot of alexandria, where the great library and museum concentrated the intellectual wealth of the ancient world. and all of the cultures there believed in an earth-centered system of the cosmos. aristarchus’s heliocentrism flew in the face of all that tradition. heliocentrism also flew in the face of terrestrial physics as propounded by aristotle. for aristotle, the natural state of motion was rest. for motion to occur, an external force was required. but aristotle did not develop the concept of inertia, where an object stays in motion unless acted upon by an external force. for aristotle, a force was needed to start motion, and a force was needed to keep an object moving. he based this idea on common sense: objects slow down and stop unless you keep pushing or pulling on them.