suppose, for example, that a galaxy lies outside but relatively close to a rich cluster of galaxies. the gravitational force of the cluster will tug on that neighboring galaxy and slow down the rate at which it moves away from the cluster due to the expansion of the universe. consider the local group of galaxies, lying on the outskirts of the virgo supercluster. the mass concentrated at the center of the virgo cluster exerts a gravitational force on the local group. as a result, the local group is moving away from the center of the virgo cluster at a velocity a few hundred kilometers per second slower than the hubble law predicts. by measuring such deviations from a smooth expansion, astronomers can estimate the total amount of mass contained in large clusters. there are two other very useful methods for measuring the amount of dark matter in galaxy clusters, and both of them have produced results in general agreement with the method of measuring galaxy velocities: gravitational lensing and x-ray emission. let’s take a look at both. as albert einstein showed in his general theory of relativity, the presence of mass bends the surrounding fabric of spacetime. light follows those bends, so very massive objects can bend light significantly.
you saw 28.4 • the challenge of dark matter 985 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1003_img1.jpeg] examples of this in the astronomy basics feature box gravitational lensing in the previous section. visible galaxies are not the only possible gravitational lenses. dark matter can also reveal its presence by producing this effect. figure 28.24 shows a galaxy cluster that is acting like a gravitational lens; the streaks and arcs you see on the picture are lensed images of more distant galaxies. gravitational lensing is well enough understood that astronomers can use the many ovals and arcs seen in this image to calculate detailed maps of how much matter there is in the cluster and how that mass is distributed. the result from studies of many such gravitational lens clusters shows that, like individual galaxies, galaxy clusters contain more than ten times as much dark matter as luminous matter. figure 28.24 cluster abell 2218. this view from the hubble space telescope shows the massive galaxy cluster abell 2218 at a distance of about 2 billion light-years. most of the yellowish objects are galaxies belonging to the cluster.
but notice the numerous long, thin streaks, many of them blue; those are the distorted and magnified images of even more distant background galaxies, gravitationally lensed by the enormous mass of the intervening cluster. by carefully analyzing the lensed images, astronomers can construct a map of the dark matter that dominates the mass of the cluster. (credit: modification of work by nasa, esa, and johan richard (caltech)) the third method astronomers use to detect and measure dark matter in galaxy clusters is to image them in the light of x-rays. when the first sensitive x-ray telescopes were launched into orbit around earth in the 1970s and trained on massive galaxy clusters, it was quickly discovered that the clusters emit copious x-ray radiation (see figure 28.25). most stars do not emit much x-ray radiation, and neither does most of the gas or dust between the stars inside galaxies. what could be emitting the x-rays seen from virtually all massive galaxy clusters? it turns out that just as galaxies have gas distributed between their stars, clusters of galaxies have gas distributed between their galaxies.
the particles in these huge reservoirs of gas are not just sitting still; rather, they are constantly moving, zooming around under the influence of the cluster’s immense gravity like mini planets around a giant sun. as they move and bump against each other, the gas heats up hotter and hotter until, at temperatures as high as 100 million k, it shines brightly at x-ray wavelengths. the more mass the cluster has, the faster the motions, the hotter the gas, and the brighter the x-rays. astronomers calculate that the mass present to induce those motions must be about ten times the mass they can see in the clusters, including all the galaxies and all the gas. once again, this is evidence that the galaxy clusters are seen to be dominated by dark matter. 986 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1004_img1.jpeg] figure 28.25 x-ray image of a galaxy cluster. this composite image shows the galaxy cluster abell 1689 at a distance of 2.3 billion light-years.