(credit: nasa) when falling, they are in free fall and accelerate at the same rate as everything around them, including their spacecraft or a camera with which they are taking photographs of earth. when doing so, astronauts experience no additional forces and therefore feel “weightless.” unlike the falling elevator passengers, however, the astronauts are falling around earth, not to earth; as a result they will continue to fall and are said to be “in orbit” around earth (see the next section for more about orbits). orbital motion and mass kepler’s laws describe the orbits of the objects whose motions are described by newton’s laws of motion and the law of gravity. knowing that gravity is the force that attracts planets toward the sun, however, allowed newton to rethink kepler’s third law. recall that kepler had found a relationship between the orbital period of a planet’s revolution and its distance from the sun. but newton’s formulation introduces the additional factor of the masses of the sun (m1) and the planet (m2), both expressed in units of the sun’s mass. newton’s universal law of gravitation can be used to show mathematically that this relationship is actually where a is the semimajor axis and p is the orbital period.
how did kepler miss this factor? in units of the sun’s mass, the mass of the sun is 1, and in units of the sun’s mass, the mass of a typical planet is a negligibly small factor. this means that the sum of the sun’s mass and a planet’s mass, , is very, very close to 1. this makes newton’s formula appear almost the same as kepler’s; the tiny mass of the planets compared to the sun is the reason that kepler did not realize that both masses had to be included in the calculation. there are many situations in astronomy, however, in which we do need to include the two mass terms—for example, when two stars or two galaxies orbit each other. including the mass term allows us to use this formula in a new way. if we can measure the motions (distances and orbital periods) of objects acting under their mutual gravity, then the formula will permit us to deduce their masses.
for example, we can calculate the mass of the sun by using the distances and orbital periods of 3.3 • newton’s universal law of gravitation 83 [image: astronomy_openstax_page101_img1.jpeg] the planets, or the mass of jupiter by noting the motions of its moons. indeed, newton’s reformulation of kepler’s third law is one of the most powerful concepts in astronomy. our ability to deduce the masses of objects from their motions is key to understanding the nature and evolution of many astronomical bodies. we will use this law repeatedly throughout this text in calculations that range from the orbits of comets to the interactions of galaxies. e x a m p l e 3 . 4 calculating the effects of gravity a planet like earth is found orbiting its star at a distance of 1 au in earth-year. can you use newton’s version of kepler’s third law to find the mass of the star? (remember that compared to the mass of a star, the mass of an earthlike planet can be considered negligible.) solution in the formula , the factor would now be approximately equal to (the mass of the star), since the planet’s mass is so small by comparison.
then the formula becomes , and we can solve for : since , so so the mass of the star is twice the mass of our sun. (remember that this way of expressing the law has units in terms of earth and the sun, so masses are expressed in units of the mass of our sun.) check your learning suppose a star with twice the mass of our sun had an earthlike planet that took 4 years to orbit the star. at what distance (semimajor axis) would this planet orbit its star? answer: again, we can neglect the mass of the planet. so and years. the formula is , so . so a is the cube root of 32. to find this, you can just ask google, “what is the cube root of 32?” and get the answer 3.2 au. you might like to try a simulation (https://openstax.org/l/30phetsimsunear) that lets you move the sun, earth, moon, and space station to see the effects of changing their distances on their gravitational forces and orbital paths. you can even turn off gravity and see what happens.