however, it also remained possible that the burst source was much closer to us and just happened to align with a more distant galaxy, so this one observation alone was not a conclusive demonstration of the extragalactic origin of gamma-ray bursts. figure 23.20 gamma-ray burst. this false-color hubble space telescope image, taken in september 1997, shows the fading afterglow of the gamma-ray burst of february 28, 1997 and the host galaxy in which the burst originated. the left view shows the region of the burst. the enlargement shows the burst source and what appears to be its host galaxy. note that the gamma-ray 808 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page826_img1.jpeg] source is not in the center of the galaxy. (credit: modification of work by andrew fruchter (stsci), elena pian (itsre-cnr), and nasa, esa) on may 8 of the same year, a burst came from the direction of the constellation camelopardalis.
in a coordinated international effort, bepposax again fixed a reasonably precise position, and almost immediately a telescope on kitt peak in arizona was able to catch the visible-light afterglow. within 2 days, the largest telescope in the world (the keck in hawaii) collected enough light to record a spectrum of the burst. the may gamma-ray burst afterglow spectrum showed absorption features from a fuzzy object that was 4 billion light- years from the sun, meaning that the location of the burst had to be at least this far away—and possibly even farther. (how astronomers can get the distance of such an object from the doppler shift in the spectrum is something we will discuss in galaxies.) what that spectrum showed was clear evidence that the gamma-ray burst had taken place in a distant galaxy. networking to catch more bursts after initial observations showed that the precise locations and afterglows of gamma-ray bursts could be found, astronomers set up a system to catch and pinpoint bursts on a regular basis. but to respond as quickly as needed to obtain usable results, astronomers realized that they needed to rely on automated systems rather than human observers happening to be in the right place at the right time.
now, when an orbiting high-energy telescope discovers a burst, its rough location is immediately transmitted to a gamma-ray coordinates network based at nasa’s goddard space flight center, alerting observers on the ground within a few seconds to look for the visible-light afterglow. the first major success with this system was achieved by a team of astronomers from the university of michigan, lawrence livermore national laboratory, and los alamos national laboratories, who designed an automated device they called the robotic optical transient search experiment (rotse), which detected a very bright visible-light counterpart in 1999. at peak, the burst was almost as bright as neptune—despite a distance (measured later by spectra from larger telescopes) of 9 billion light-years. more recently, astronomers have been able to take this a step further, using wide-field-of-view telescopes to stare at large fractions of the sky in the hope that a gamma-ray burst will occur at the right place and time, and be recorded by the telescope’s camera. these wide-field telescopes are not sensitive to faint sources, but rotse showed that gamma-ray burst afterglows could sometimes be very bright.
astronomers’ hopes were vindicated in march 2008, when an extremely bright gamma-ray burst occurred and its light was captured by two wide-field camera systems in chile: the polish “pi of the sky” and the russian- italian tortora [telescopio ottimizzato per la ricerca dei transienti ottici rapidi (italian for telescope optimized for the research of rapid optical transients)] (see figure 23.21). according to the data taken by these telescopes, for a period of about 30 seconds, the light from the gamma-ray burst was bright enough that it could have been seen by the unaided eye had a person been looking in the right place at the right time. adding to our amazement, later observations by larger telescopes demonstrated that the burst occurred at a distance of 8 billion light-years from earth! 23.6 • the mystery of the gamma-ray bursts 809 figure 23.21 gamma-ray burst observed in march 2008. the extremely luminous afterglow of grb 080319b was imaged by the swift observatory in x-rays (left) and visible light/ultraviolet (right).