table 3: distances to stars in orion star distance from earth betelgeuse 642.5 light-years belatrix 244.6 light-years alnitak 800 light-years mintaka 916 light-years alnilam 1342 light-years saiph 171 light-years rigel 772.9 light-years figure 16: orion figure 17: orion in profile [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page26_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page26_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 27 component 4 – scientific theories, scientific method scientific theories every theory is not a scientific theory. if you are trying to figure out how something works, or why it works, you develop a theory. but, to be a scientific theory, it must be pushed further. a scientific theory must be: • testable • continually tested • simple • elegant testable. this means that there has to be some way to test the theory. continuously tested. this means that although we have tested the theory in the past, we must continue to test it. one job of a scientist is to try to find ways to disprove a scientific theory. simple.
this means that a scientific theory should only be as complex as it needs to be. elegant. this means that a scientific theory should be pleasing to the mind. a scientific theory that pulls together pieces that were previously separate, is elegant. scientific theories can never be proven to be true. scientific theories can be proven to be false by one example of a repeatable outcome. it just takes one contradiction to tear down part or all of a theory. but since it is impossible to test every possible case of a situation, you can’t prove that it is always true. occam’s razor occam’s razor was named after william of ockham who lived 1285 -1349 ce. this assertion says that if you have more than one hypothesis that predicts a result equally well, the one with the smallest number of assumptions should be selected. a more complicated solution may ultimately make better predictions, but initially if they all make equally good predictions, the smaller the number of assumptions that are made, the better. what this means is, simpler is better.
scientific theories must be: testable, continuously tested, simple, and elegant astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 28 the scientific method there is a process that scientists follow when trying to understand something new and different. it is called the scientific method (see figure 18). the three steps are: • observation • theory • prediction observation. as scientists do their work, there are things we do not understand. these things are brought to our attention as we do observations. theory. to try to understand why and how things happened, scientists develop a theory of what could have caused what they have seen. since this is to be a scientific theory, it must be tested. prediction. based on our scientific theory, we make a prediction about what should happen in the future. we then test our prediction by making more observations. although you can start anywhere in the circle, most often we initially see something we want to understand, so usually we start with observation. working the process some examples of scientific theories and how they were tested are: • newton’s laws of gravity. the laws depend on a gravitational constant. if the theory is correct, then everywhere we look in the universe we should see the same gravitational constant.
when we look at venus, mars, or jupiter, we see that they behave as newton predicted with his laws. • einstein’s theory of general relativity. this theory says that space is curved in the vicinity of massive objects. if this is true, then when there is a total solar eclipse, stars that are slightly behind the sun should appear beside the sun as their light curves around the sun. during a total solar eclipse this is seen to be true, in the amount predicted by the theory of general relativity. figure 18: scientific method the scientific method involves: observation, theory and prediction [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page28_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 29 component 5 – remembering which star is which since early prehistoric times, humans have needed to know what time of year it was. this information would tell them when to expect the annual floods or heavy rains. it would tell them when the last frost can be expected. it would tell them when to expect the yearly animal migrations. as humans began to leave land and go forth in boats, the stars could also tell them information on their latitude, and eventually even their longitude.