(credit left: modification of work by bob and bill twardy/adam block/ noao/aura/nsf; credit right: modification of work by nasa, esa, and the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura)-esa/hubble collaboration) chapter outline 28.1 observations of distant galaxies 28.2 galaxy mergers and active galactic nuclei 28.3 the distribution of galaxies in space 28.4 the challenge of dark matter 28.5 the formation and evolution of galaxies and structure in the universe thinking ahead how and when did galaxies like our milky way form? which formed first: stars or galaxies? can we see direct evidence of the changes galaxies undergo over their lifetimes? if so, what determines whether a galaxy will “grow up” to be spiral or elliptical? and what is the role of “nature versus nurture”? that is to say, how much of a galaxy’s development is determined by what it looks like when it is born and how much is influenced by its environment? astronomers today have the tools needed to explore the universe almost back to the time it began.
the huge new telescopes and sensitive detectors built in the last decades make it possible to obtain both images and spectra of galaxies so distant that their light has traveled to reach us for more than 13 billion years—more than 90% of the way back to the big bang: we can use the finite speed of light and the vast size of the universe as a cosmic time machine to peer back and observe how galaxies formed and evolved over time. studying galaxies so far away in any detail is always a major challenge, largely because their distance makes them appear very faint. however, today’s large telescopes on the ground and in space are finally making such a task possible. the evolution and distribution of galaxies 28 [image: astronomy_openstax_page973_img1.jpeg] 28.1 observations of distant galaxies learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: let’s begin by exploring some techniques astronomers use to study how galaxies are born and change over cosmic time. suppose you wanted to understand how adult humans got to be the way they are.
if you were very dedicated and patient, you could actually observe a sample of babies from birth, following them through childhood, adolescence, and into adulthood, and making basic measurements such as their heights, weights, and the proportional sizes of different parts of their bodies to understand how they change over time. unfortunately, we have no such possibility for understanding how galaxies grow and change over time: in a human lifetime—or even over the entire history of human civilization—individual galaxies change hardly at all. we need other tools than just patiently observing single galaxies in order to study and understand those long, slow changes. we do, however, have one remarkable asset in studying galactic evolution. as we have seen, the universe itself is a kind of time machine that permits us to observe remote galaxies as they were long ago. for the closest galaxies, like the andromeda galaxy, the time the light takes to reach us is on the order of a few hundred thousand to a few million years. typically not much changes over times that short—individual stars in the galaxy may be born or die, but the overall structure and appearance of the galaxy will remain the same.
but we have observed galaxies so far away that we are seeing them as they were when the light left them more than 13 billion years ago. by observing more distant objects, we look further back toward a time when both galaxies and the universe were young (figure 28.2). for something similar on earth, imagine your college doing a project where families of international students around the world are asked to send a daily newspaper from their hometown. because there is a limited budget, the papers are sent via ordinary mail. the farther a town is from the united states, the longer it takes for the papers to get to the college, and the older the news is by the time it arrives. explain how astronomers use light to learn about distant galaxies long ago discuss the evidence showing that the first stars formed when the universe was less than 10% of its current age describe the major differences observed between galaxies seen in the distant, early universe and galaxies seen in the nearby universe today 956 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org figure 28.2 astronomical time travel.