however, most of the mass of uranus and neptune resides in these cores, demonstrating that the two outer planets were unable to attract massive quantities of hydrogen and helium when they were first forming. figure 11.7 internal structures of the jovian planets. jupiter and saturn are composed primarily of hydrogen and helium (but hydrogen dominates), but uranus and neptune consist in large part of compounds of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen. (the diagrams are drawn to scale; numbers show radii in thousands of kilometers.) internal heat sources because of their large sizes, all the giant planets were strongly heated during their formation by the collapse of surrounding material onto their cores. jupiter, being the largest, was the hottest. some of this primordial heat can still remain inside such large planets. in addition, it is possible for giant, largely gaseous planets to generate heat after formation by slowly contracting. (with so large a mass, even a minuscule amount of shrinking can generate significant heat.) the effect of these internal energy sources is to raise the temperatures in the interiors and atmospheres of the planets higher than we would expect from the heating effect of the sun alone.
jupiter has the largest internal energy source, amounting to watts; that is, it is heated from inside with energy equivalent to 4 million billion 100-watt lightbulbs. this energy is about the same as the total solar energy absorbed by jupiter. the atmosphere of jupiter is therefore something of a cross between a normal planetary atmosphere (like earth’s), which obtains most of its energy from the sun, and the atmosphere of a star, which is entirely heated by an internal energy source. most of the internal energy of jupiter is primordial heat, left over from the formation of the planet 4.5 billion years ago. saturn has an internal energy source about half as large as that of jupiter, which means (since its mass is only about one quarter as great) that it is producing twice as much energy per kilogram of material as does jupiter. since saturn is expected to have much less primordial heat, there must be another source at work generating most of this watts of power. this source is the separation of helium from hydrogen in saturn’s interior. in the liquid hydrogen mantle, the heavier helium forms droplets that sink toward the core, releasing gravitational energy.
in effect, saturn is still differentiating—letting lighter material rise and heavier material fall. uranus and neptune are different. neptune has a small internal energy source, while uranus does not emit a measurable amount of internal heat. as a result, these two planets have almost the same atmospheric 11.2 • the giant planets 375 [image: astronomy_openstax_page393_img1.jpeg] temperature, in spite of neptune’s greater distance from the sun. no one knows why these two planets differ in their internal heat, but all this shows how nature can contrive to make each world a little bit different from its neighbors. magnetic fields each of the giant planets has a strong magnetic field, generated by electric currents in its rapidly spinning interior. associated with the magnetic fields are the planets’ magnetospheres, which are regions around the planet within which the planet’s own magnetic field dominates over the general interplanetary magnetic field. the magnetospheres of these planets are their largest features, extending millions of kilometers into space.
in the late 1950s, astronomers discovered that jupiter was a source of radio waves that got more intense at longer rather than at shorter wavelengths—just the reverse of what is expected from thermal radiation (radiation caused by the normal vibrations of particles within all matter). such behavior is typical, however, of the radiation emitted when high-speed electrons are accelerated by a magnetic field. we call this synchrotron radiation because it was first observed on earth in particle accelerators, called synchrotrons. this was our first hint that jupiter must have a strong magnetic field. later observations showed that the radio waves are coming from a region surrounding jupiter with a diameter several times that of the planet itself (figure 11.8). the evidence suggested that a vast number of charged atomic particles must be circulating around jupiter, spiraling around the lines of force of a magnetic field associated with the planet. this is just what we observe happening, but on a smaller scale, in the van allen belt around earth. the magnetic fields of saturn, uranus, and neptune, discovered by the spacecraft that first passed close to these planets, work in a similar way, but are not as strong. figure 11.8 jupiter in radio waves.