the large magellanic cloud (so named because magellan’s crew were the first europeans to record it) is a small, irregularly shaped galaxy near our own milky way. it was in this galaxy that henrietta leavitt discovered the cepheid period-luminosity relation. (credit: eso) leavitt found that the brighter-appearing cepheids always have the longer periods of light variation. thus, she reasoned, the period must be related to the luminosity of the stars. when leavitt did this work, the distance to the magellanic clouds was not known, so she was only able to show that luminosity was related to period. she could not determine exactly what the relationship is. to define the period-luminosity relation with actual numbers (to calibrate it), astronomers first had to measure the actual distances to a few nearby cepheids in another way. (this was accomplished by finding cepheids associated in clusters with other stars whose distances could be estimated from their spectra, as discussed in the next section of this chapter.) but once the relation was thus defined, it could give us the distance to any cepheid, wherever it might be located (figure 19.12).
19.3 • variable stars: one key to cosmic distances 653 [image: astronomy_openstax_page671_img1.jpeg] figure 19.12 how to use a cepheid to measure distance. (a) find a cepheid variable star and measure its period. (b) use the period-luminosity relation to calculate the star’s luminosity. (c) measure the star’s apparent brightness. (d) compare the luminosity with the apparent brightness to calculate the distance. here at last was the technique astronomers had been searching for to break the confines of distance that parallax imposed on them. cepheids can be observed and monitored, it turns out, in many parts of our own galaxy and in other nearby galaxies as well. astronomers, including ejnar hertzsprung and harvard’s harlow shapley, immediately saw the potential of the new technique; they and many others set to work exploring more distant reaches of space using cepheids as signposts. in the 1920s, edwin hubble made one of the most significant astronomical discoveries of all time using cepheids, when he observed them in nearby galaxies and discovered the expansion of the universe.
as we will see, this work still continues, as the hubble space telescope and other modern instruments try to identify and measure individual cepheids in galaxies farther and farther away. the most distant known variable stars are all cepheids, with some about 60 million light- years away. john goodricke the brief life of john goodricke (figure 19.13) is a testament to the human spirit under adversity. born deaf and unable to speak, goodricke nevertheless made a number of pioneering discoveries in astronomy through patient and careful observations of the heavens. figure 19.13 john goodricke (1764–1786). this portrait of goodricke by artist j. scouler hangs in the royal astronomical society voyagers in astronomy 654 19 • celestial distances access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page672_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page672_img2.jpeg] in london. there is some controversy about whether this is actually what goodricke looked like or whether the painting was much retouched to please his family.
(credit: james scouler) born in holland, where his father was on a diplomatic mission, goodricke was sent back to england at age eight to study at a special school for the deaf. he did sufficiently well to enter warrington academy, a secondary school that offered no special assistance for students with handicaps. his mathematics teacher there inspired an interest in astronomy, and in 1781, at age 17, goodricke began observing the sky at his family home in york, england. within a year, he had discovered the brightness variations of the star algol (discussed in the stars: a celestial census) and suggested that an unseen companion star was causing the changes, a theory that waited over 100 years for proof. his paper on the subject was read before the royal society (the main british group of scientists) in 1783 and won him a medal from that distinguished group. in the meantime, goodricke had discovered two other stars that varied regularly, beta lyrae and delta cephei, both of which continued to interest astronomers for years to come. goodricke shared his interest in observing with his older cousin, edward pigott, who went on to discover other variable stars during his much longer life.