this composite image from nasa’s galileo spacecraft shows close-ups (the two inset photos) of two separate volcanic eruptions on jupiter’s volcanic moon, io. in the upper inset image, you can see a close up of a bluish plume rising about 140 kilometers above the surface of the volcano. in the lower inset image is the prometheus plume, rising about 75 kilometers from io’s surface. the prometheus plume is named for the greek god of fire. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl) 12.2 • the galilean moons of jupiter 401 [image: astronomy_openstax_page419_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page419_img2.jpeg] watch a brief movie (https://openstax.org/l/30iosurf) made from voyager and galileo data, showing a rotating io with its dramatic surface features. the galileo data show that most of the volcanism on io consists of hot silicate lava, like the volcanoes on earth. sometimes the hot lava encounters frozen deposits of sulfur and sulfur dioxide. when these icy deposits are suddenly heated, the result is great eruptive plumes far larger than any ejected from terrestrial volcanoes.
as the rising plumes cool, the sulfur and sulfur dioxide recondense as solid particles that fall back to the surface in colorful “snowfalls” that extend as much as a thousand kilometers from the vent. major new surface features were even seen to appear between galileo orbits, as shown in figure 12.9. figure 12.9 volcanic changes on io. these three images were taken of the same 1700-kilometer-square region of io in april 1997, september 1997, and july 1999. the dark volcanic center called pillan patera experienced a huge eruption, producing a dark deposit some 400 kilometers across (seen as the grey area in the upper center of the middle image). in the right image, however, some of the new dark deposit is already being covered by reddish material from the volcano pele. also, a small unnamed volcano to the right of pillan has erupted since 1997, and some of its dark deposit and a yellow ring around it are visible on the right image (to the right of the grey spot). the color range is exaggerated in these images.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl/university of arizona) as the galileo mission drew to a close, controllers were willing to take risks in getting close to io. approaching this moon is a dangerous maneuver because the belts of atomic particles trapped in jupiter’s magnetic environment are at their most intense near io’s orbit. indeed, in its very first pass by io, the spacecraft absorbed damaging radiation beyond its design levels. to keep the system working at all, controllers had to modify or disable various fault-protection software routines in the onboard computers. in spite of these difficulties, the spacecraft achieved four successful io flybys, obtaining photos and spectra of the surface with unprecedented resolution. maps of io reveal more than 100 recently active volcanoes. huge flows spread out from many of these vents, covering about 25% of the moon’s total surface with still-warm lava. from these measurements, it seems clear that the bright surface colors that first attracted attention to io are the result of a thin veneer of sulfur compounds. the underlying volcanism is driven by eruptions of molten silicates, just like on earth (figure 12.10).
link to learning 402 12 • rings, moons, and pluto access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page420_img1.jpeg] figure 12.10 lava fountains on io. galileo captured a number of eruptions along the chain of huge volcanic calderas (or pits) on io called tvashtar catena in this false-color image combining infrared and visible light. the bright orange-yellow areas at left are places where fresh, hot lava is erupting from below ground. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl) tidal heating how can io remain volcanically active in spite of its small size? the answer, as we hinted earlier, lies in the effect of gravity, through tidal heating. io is about the same distance from jupiter as our moon is from earth. yet jupiter is more than 300 times more massive than earth, causing forces that pull io into an elongated shape, with a several-kilometer-high bulge extending toward jupiter. if io always kept exactly the same face turned toward jupiter, this bulge would not generate heat.