summarize the four main hypotheses for the origin of the moon. 14. what are the difficulties with the capture hypothesis of the moon’s origin? 15. what is the main consequence of mercury’s orbit being so highly eccentric? 16. describe the basic internal structure of mercury. 17. how was the rotation rate of mercury determined? 18. what is the relationship between mercury’s rotational period and orbital period? 318 9 • exercises access for free at openstax.org 19. the features of mercury are named in honor of famous people in which fields of endeavor? 20. what do our current ideas about the origins of the moon and mercury have in common? how do they differ? thought questions 21. one of the primary scientific objectives of the apollo program was the return of lunar material. why was this so important? what can be learned from samples? are they still of value now? 22. apollo astronaut david scott dropped a hammer and a feather together on the moon, and both reached the ground at the same time. what are the two distinct advantages that this experiment on the moon had over the same kind of experiment as performed by galileo on earth? 23.
galileo thought the lunar maria might be seas of water. if you had no better telescope than the one he had, could you demonstrate that they are not composed of water? 24. why did it take so long for geologists to recognize that the lunar craters had an impact origin rather than a volcanic one? 25. how might a crater made by the impact of a comet with the moon differ from a crater made by the impact of an asteroid? 26. why are the lunar mountains smoothly rounded rather than having sharp, pointed peaks (as they were almost always depicted in science-fiction illustrations and films before the first lunar landings)? 27. the lunar highlands have about ten times more craters in a given area than do the maria. does this mean that the highlands are 10 times older? explain your reasoning. 28. at the end of the section on the lunar surface, your authors say that lunar night and day each last about two earth weeks. after looking over the information in earth, moon, and sky and this chapter about the motions of the moon, can you explain why? (it helps to draw a diagram for yourself.) 29.
give several reasons mercury would be a particularly unpleasant place to build an astronomical observatory. 30. if, in the remote future, we establish a base on mercury, keeping track of time will be a challenge. discuss how to define a year on mercury, and the two ways to define a day. can you come up with ways that humans raised on earth might deal with time cycles on mercury? 31. the moon has too little iron, mercury too much. how can both of these anomalies be the result of giant impacts? explain how the same process can yield such apparently contradictory results. figuring for yourself 32. in the future, astronomers discover a solid moon around a planet orbiting one of the nearest stars. this moon has a diameter of 1948 km and a mass of kg. what is its density? 33. the moon was once closer to earth than it is now. when it was at half its present distance, how long was its period of revolution? (see orbits and gravity for the formula to use.) 34. astronomers believe that the deposit of lava in the giant mare basins did not happen in one flow but in many different eruptions spanning some time.
indeed, in any one mare, we find a variety of rock ages, typically spanning about 100 million years. the individual lava flows as seen in hadley rille by the apollo 15 astronauts were about 4 m thick. estimate the average time interval between the beginnings of successive lava flows if the total depth of the lava in the mare is 2 km. 35. the moon requires about 1 month (0.08 year) to orbit earth. its distance from us is about 400,000 km (0.0027 au). use kepler’s third law, as modified by newton, to calculate the mass of earth relative to the 9 • exercises 319 sun. 320 9 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 10.1 spirit rover on mars. this may 2004 image shows the tracks made by the mars exploration spirit rover on the surface of the red planet. spirit was active on mars between 2004 and 2010, twenty times longer than its planners had expected. it “drove” over 7.73 kilometers in the process of examining the martian landscape.