if the cratering rate has stayed the same, we can figure out how long it must have taken to make all the craters we see in the lunar maria. our calculations show that it would have taken several billion years. this result is similar to the age determined for the maria from radioactive dating of returned samples—3.3 to 3.8 billion years old. the fact that these two calculations agree suggests that astronomers’ original assumption was right: comets and asteroids in approximately their current numbers have been impacting planetary surfaces for billions of years. calculations carried out for other planets (and their moons) indicate that they also have been subject to about the same number of interplanetary impacts during this time. we have good reason to believe, however, that earlier than 3.8 billion years ago, the impact rates must have been a great deal higher. this becomes immediately evident when comparing the numbers of craters on the lunar highlands with those on the maria. typically, there are 10 times more craters on the highlands than on a similar area of maria.
yet the radioactive dating of highland samples showed that they are only a little older than the maria, typically 4.2 billion years rather than 3.8 billion years. if the rate of impacts had been constant throughout the moon’s history, the highlands would have had to be at least 10 times older. they would thus have had to form 38 billion years ago—long before the universe itself began. in science, when an assumption leads to an implausible conclusion, we must go back and re-examine that assumption—in this case, the constant impact rate. the contradiction is resolved if the impact rate varied over time, with a much heavier bombardment earlier than 3.8 billion years ago (figure 9.19). this “heavy bombardment” produced most of the craters we see today in the highlands. figure 9.19 cratering rates over time. the number of craters being made on the moon’s surface has varied with time over the past 4.3 billion years. this idea we have been exploring—that large impacts (especially during the early history of the solar system) played a major role in shaping the worlds we see—is not unique to our study of the moon.
as you read through the other chapters about the planets, you will see further indications that a number of the present- day characteristics of our system may be due to its violent past. 9.3 • impact craters 305 [image: astronomy_openstax_page323_img1.jpeg] 9.4 the origin of the moon learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: ideas for the origin of the moon it is characteristic of modern science to ask how things originated. understanding the origin of the moon has proven to be challenging for planetary scientists, however. part of the difficulty is simply that we know so much about the moon (quite the opposite of our usual problem in astronomy). as we will see, one key problem is that the moon is both tantalizingly similar to earth and frustratingly different. most of the earlier hypotheses for the moon’s origin followed one of three general ideas: 1. the fission theory—the moon was once part of earth, but somehow separated from it early in their history. 2. the sister theory—the moon formed together with (but independent of) earth, as we believe many moons of the outer planets formed. 3.
the capture theory—the moon formed elsewhere in the solar system and was captured by earth. unfortunately, there seem to be fundamental problems with each of these ideas. perhaps the easiest hypothesis to reject is the capture theory. its primary drawback is that no one knows of any way that early earth could have captured such a large moon from elsewhere. one body approaching another cannot go into orbit around it without a substantial loss of energy; this is the reason that spacecraft destined to orbit other planets are equipped with retro-rockets. furthermore, if such a capture did take place, the captured object would go into a very eccentric orbit rather than the nearly circular orbit our moon occupies today. finally, there are too many compositional similarities between earth and the moon, particularly an identical fraction of the major isotopes2 of oxygen, to justify seeking a completely independent origin. the fission hypothesis, which states that the moon separated from earth, was suggested in the late nineteenth century. modern calculations have shown that this sort of spontaneous fission or splitting is impossible. furthermore, it is difficult to understand how a moon made out of terrestrial material in this way could have developed the many distinctive chemical differences now known to characterize our neighbor.