these are known as c-type asteroids (“c” for carbonaceous). two of the largest asteroids, ceres and pallas, are primitive, as are almost all of the asteroids in the outer part of the belt. in 2020 and 2021, two of these c-type asteroids, bennu and ryugu, were visited by spacecraft that briefly touched their surfaces. the second most populous group is the s-type asteroids, where “s” stands for a stony or silicate composition. here, the dark carbon compounds are missing, resulting in higher reflectivity and clearer spectral signatures of silicate minerals. the s-type asteroids are also chemically primitive, but their different composition indicates that they were probably formed in a different location in the solar system from the c-type asteroids. asteroids of a third class, much less numerous than those of the first two, are composed primarily of metal and are called m-type asteroids (“m” for metallic). spectroscopically, the identification of metal is difficult, but for at least the largest m-type asteroid, psyche, this identification has been confirmed by radar.
since a metal asteroid, like an airplane or ship, is a much better reflector of radar than is a stony object, psyche appears bright when we aim a radar beam at it. in 2023, a nasa mission, conveniently named psyche, was launched toward this asteroid, with a scheduled arrival in 2029. how did such metal asteroids come to be? we suspect that each came from a parent body large enough for its molten interior to settle out or differentiate, and the heavier metals sank to the center. when this parent body shattered in a later collision, the fragments from the core were rich in metals. there is enough metal in even a 1-kilometer m-type asteroid to supply the world with iron and many other industrial metals for the foreseeable future, if we could bring one safely to earth. in addition to the m-type asteroids, a few other asteroids show signs of early heating and differentiation. these have basaltic surfaces like the volcanic plains of the moon and mars; the large asteroid vesta (discussed in a moment) is in this last category. the different classes of asteroids are found at different distances from the sun (figure 13.3).
by tracing how asteroid compositions vary with distance from the sun, we can reconstruct some of the properties of the solar nebula from which they originally formed. figure 13.3 where different types of asteroids are found. asteroids of different composition are distributed at different 13.1 • asteroids 439 [image: astronomy_openstax_page457_img1.jpeg] distances from the sun. the s-type and c-type are both primitive; the m-type consists of cores of differentiated parent bodies. vesta: a differentiated asteroid vesta is one of the most interesting of the asteroids. it orbits the sun with a semi-major axis of 2.4 au in the inner part of the asteroid belt. its relatively high reflectivity of almost 30% makes it the brightest asteroid, so bright that it is actually visible to the unaided eye if you know just where to look. but its real claim to fame is that its surface is covered with basalt, indicating that vesta is a differentiated object that must once have been volcanically active, in spite of its small size (about 500 kilometers in diameter).
meteorites from vesta’s surface (figure 13.4), identified by comparing their spectra with that of vesta itself, have landed on earth and are available for direct study in the laboratory. we thus know a great deal about this asteroid. the age of the lava flows from which these meteorites derived has been measured at 4.4 to 4.5 billion years, very soon after the formation of the solar system. this age is consistent with what we might expect for volcanoes on vesta; whatever process heated such a small object was probably intense and short-lived. in 2016, a meteorite fell in turkey that could be identified with a particular lava flow as revealed by the orbiting dawn spacecraft. figure 13.4 piece of vesta. this meteorite (rock that fell from space) has been identified as a volcanic fragment from the crust of asteroid vesta. (credit: modification of work by r. kempton (new england meteoritical services)) asteroids up close on the way to its 1995 encounter with jupiter, the galileo spacecraft was targeted to fly close to two main-belt s-type asteroids called gaspra and ida.