estimates of the distance to venus were made as venus crossed the face of the sun in 1761 and 1769, and an international campaign was organized to estimate the distance to the asteroid eros in the early 1930s, when its orbit brought it close to earth. more recently, venus crossed (or transited) the surface of the sun in 2004 and 2012, and allowed us to make a modern distance estimate, although, as we will see below, by then it wasn’t needed (figure 19.2). if you would like more information on just how the motion of venus across the sun helped us pin down distances in the solar system, you can turn to a nice explanation (https://openstax.org/l/30venusandsun) by a nasa astronomer. figure 19.2 venus transits the sun, 2012. this striking “picture” of venus crossing the face of the sun (it’s the black dot at about 2 o’clock) is more than just an impressive image. taken with the solar dynamics observatory spacecraft and special filters, it shows a modern transit of venus.
such events allowed astronomers in the 1800s to estimate the distance to venus. they measured the time it took venus to cross the face of the sun from different latitudes on earth. the differences in times can be used to estimate the distance to the planet. today, radar is used for much more precise distance estimates. (credit: modification of work by nasa/sdo, aia) the key to our modern determination of solar system dimensions is radar, a type of radio wave that can bounce off solid objects (figure 19.3). as discussed in several earlier chapters, by timing how long a radar beam (traveling at the speed of light) takes to reach another world and return, we can measure the distance involved very accurately. in 1961, radar signals were bounced off venus for the first time, providing a direct measurement of the distance from earth to venus in terms of light-seconds (from the roundtrip travel time of the radar signal). subsequently, radar has been used to determine the distances to mercury, mars, the satellites of jupiter, the rings of saturn, and several asteroids.
note, by the way, that it is not possible to use radar to measure the link to learning 19.1 • fundamental units of distance 639 [image: astronomy_openstax_page657_img1.jpeg] distance to the sun directly because the sun does not reflect radar very efficiently. but we can measure the distance to many other solar system objects and use kepler’s laws to give us the distance to the sun. figure 19.3 radar telescope. this dish-shaped antenna, part of the nasa deep space network in california’s mojave desert, is 70 meters wide. nicknamed the “mars antenna,” this radar telescope can send and receive radar waves, and thus measure the distances to planets, satellites, and asteroids. (credit: nasa/jpl-caltech) from the various (related) solar system distances, astronomers selected the average distance from earth to the sun as our standard “measuring stick” within the solar system. when earth and the sun are closest, they are about 147.1 million kilometers apart; when earth and the sun are farthest, they are about 152.1 million kilometers apart. the average of these two distances is called the astronomical unit (au).
we then express all the other distances in the solar system in terms of the au. years of painstaking analyses of radar measurements have led to a determination of the length of the au to a precision of about one part in a billion. the length of 1 au can be expressed in light travel time as 499.004854 light-seconds, or about 8.3 light- minutes. if we use the definition of the meter given previously, this is equivalent to 1 au = 149,597,870,700 meters. these distances are, of course, given here to a much higher level of precision than is normally needed. in this text, we are usually content to express numbers to a couple of significant places and leave it at that. for our purposes, it will be sufficient to round off these numbers: we now know the absolute distance scale within our own solar system with fantastic accuracy. this is the first link in the chain of cosmic distances. the distances between the celestial bodies in our solar system are sometimes difficult to grasp or put into perspective.