preface 1 chapter 1: science and the universe: a brief tour chapter 2: observing the sky: the birth of astronomy chapter 3: orbits and gravity chapter 4: earth, moon, and sky chapter 5: radiation and spectra chapter 6: astronomical instruments chapter 7: other worlds: an introduction to the solar system chapter 8: earth as a planet chapter 9: cratered worlds chapter 10: earthlike planets: venus and mars chapter 11: the giant planets chapter 12: rings, moons, and pluto chapter 13: comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system chapter 14: cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system chapter 15: the sun: a garden-variety star chapter 16: the sun: a nuclear powerhouse chapter 17: analyzing starlight chapter 18: the stars: a celestial census chapter 19: celestial distances chapter 20: between the stars: gas and dust in space chapter 21: the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system chapter 22: stars from adolescence to old age chapter 23: the death of stars chapter 24: black holes and curved spacetime chapter 25: the milky way galaxy chapter 26: galaxies chapter 27: active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes chapter 28: the evolution and distribution of galaxies chapter 29: the big bang chapter 30: life in the universe appendix a: how to study for your introductory astronomy course appendix b: astronomy websites, pictures, and apps appendix c: scientific notation appendix d: units used in science appendix e: some useful constants for astronomy appendix f: physical and orbital data for the planets appendix g: selected moons of the planets appendix h: upcoming total eclipses appendix i: the nearest stars, brown dwarfs, and white dwarfs appendix j: the brightest twenty stars appendix k: the chemical elements appendix l: the constellations appendix m: star charts and sky event resources currency and accuracy astronomy 2e has information and images from the ligo and virgo gravitational-wave detectors, the perseverance/ingenuity mission to mars, the juno mission to jupiter, and many other recent projects in astronomy.
the discussion of exoplanets has been updated with recent information—indicating not just individual examples, but trends in what sorts of planets seem to be most common. black holes receive their own chapter, and the role of supermassive black holes in active galaxies and galaxy evolution is clearly 2 preface access for free at openstax.org explained. chapters have been reviewed by subject-matter experts for accuracy and currency. flexibility because there are many different ways to teach introductory astronomy, we have made the text as flexible as we could. math examples are shown in separate sections throughout, so that you can leave out the math or require it as you deem best. each section of a chapter treats a different aspect of the topic being covered; a number of sections could be omitted in shorter overview courses and can be included where you need more depth. and, as we have already discussed, you can customize the book in a variety of ways that have never been possible in traditional textbooks. student-centered focus this book is written to help students understand the big picture rather than get lost in random factoids to memorize. the language is accessible and inviting. helpful diagrams and summary tables review and encapsulate the ideas being covered.
each chapter contains interactive group activities you can assign to help students work in teams and pool their knowledge. interactive online resources interesting “links to learning” are scattered throughout the chapters, which direct students to online animations, short videos, or enrichment readings to enhance their learning. also, the resources listed at the end of each chapter include links to websites and other useful educational videos. feature boxes that help students think outside the box a variety of feature boxes within the chapters connect astronomy to the students’ other subjects and humanize the face of astronomy by highlighting the lives of the men and women who have been key to its progress. besides the math examples that we’ve already mentioned, the boxes include: making connections. this feature connects the chapter topic to students’ experiences with other fields, from poetry to engineering, popular culture, and natural disasters. voyagers in astronomy. this feature presents brief and engaging biographies of the people behind historically significant discoveries, as well as emerging research. astronomy basics. this feature explains basic science concepts that we often (incorrectly) assume students know from earlier classes. seeing for yourself. this feature provides practical ways that students can make astronomical observations on their own. end-of-chapter materials to extend students’ learning chapter summaries.