in this graph, one of the most comprehensive in all of 1 by equivalent mass we mean that which would result if the energy were turned into mass using einstein’s formula, e = mc2. 29.2 • a model of the universe 1015 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1033_img1.jpeg] science, we chart the development of the scale of space in the cosmos against the passage of time. time increases to the right, and the scale of the universe, r, increases upward in the figure. today, at the point marked “present” along the time axis, r is increasing in each model. we know that the galaxies are currently expanding away from each other, no matter which model is right. (the same situation holds for a baseball thrown high into the air. while it may eventually fall back down, near the beginning of the throw it moves upward most rapidly.) the various lines moving across the graph correspond to different models of the universe. the straight dashed line corresponds to the empty universe with no deceleration; it intercepts the time axis at a time, t0 (the hubble time), in the past. this is not a realistic model but gives us a measure to compare other models to.
the curves below the dashed line represent models with no dark energy and with varying amounts of deceleration, starting from the big bang at shorter times in the past. the curve above the dashed line shows what happens if the expansion is accelerating. let’s take a closer look at the future according to the different models. figure 29.9 models of the universe. this graph plots r, the scale of the universe, against time for various cosmological models. curve 1 represents a universe where the density is greater than the critical value; this model predicts that the universe will eventually collapse. curve 2 represents a universe with a density lower than critical; the universe will continue to expand but at an ever-slower rate. curve 3 is a critical-density universe; in this universe, the expansion will gradually slow to a stop infinitely far in the future. curve 4 represents a universe that is accelerating because of the effects of dark energy. the dashed line is for an empty universe, one in which the expansion is not slowed by gravity or accelerated by dark energy. time is very compressed on this graph. let’s start with curve 1 in figure 29.9.
in this case, the actual density of the universe is higher than the critical density and there is no dark energy. this universe will stop expanding at some time in the future and begin contracting. this model is called a closed universe and corresponds to the universe on the left in figure 29.8. eventually, the scale drops to zero, which means that space will have shrunk to an infinitely small size. the noted physicist john wheeler called this the “big crunch,” because matter, energy, space, and time would all be crushed out of existence. note that the “big crunch” is the opposite of the big bang—it is an implosion. the universe is not expanding but rather collapsing in upon itself. some scientists speculated that another big bang might follow the crunch, giving rise to a new expansion phase, and then another contraction—perhaps oscillating between successive big bangs and big crunches indefinitely in the past and future. such speculation was sometimes referred to as the oscillating theory of the universe. the challenge for theorists was how to describe the transition from collapse (when space and time themselves disappear into the big crunch) to expansion.
with the discovery of dark energy, however, it does not appear that the universe will experience a big crunch, so we can put worrying about it on the back burner. if the density of the universe is less than the critical density (curve 2 in figure 29.9 and the universe second from the left in figure 29.8), gravity is never important enough to stop the expansion, and so the universe expands forever. such a universe is infinite and this model is called an open universe. time and space begin with the big bang, but they have no end; the universe simply continues expanding, always a bit more slowly as 1016 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1034_img1.jpeg] time goes on. groups of galaxies eventually get so far apart that it would be difficult for observers in any of them to see the others. (see the feature box on what might the universe be like in the distant future? for more about the distant future in the closed and open universe models.) at the critical density (curve 3), the universe can just barely expand forever.