when you look up at a star-filled sky on a clear night, all the stars visible to the unaided eye are part of a single collection of stars we call the milky way galaxy, or simply the galaxy. (when referring to the milky way, we capitalize galaxy; when talking about other galaxies of stars, we use lowercase galaxy.) the sun is one of hundreds of billions of stars that make up the galaxy; its extent, as we will see, staggers the human imagination. within a sphere 10 light-years in radius centered on the sun, we find roughly ten stars. within a sphere 100 light-years in radius, there are roughly 10,000 stars—far too many to count or name—but we have still traversed only a tiny part of the milky way galaxy. within a 1000-light-year sphere, we find some ten million stars; within a sphere of 100,000 light-years, we finally encompass the entire milky way galaxy. our galaxy looks like a giant disk with a small ball in the middle.
if we could move outside our galaxy and look down on the disk of the milky way from above, it would probably resemble the galaxy in figure 1.9, with its spiral structure outlined by the blue light of hot adolescent stars. 20 1 • science and the universe: a brief tour access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page38_img1.jpeg] figure 1.9 spiral galaxy. this galaxy of billions of stars, called by its catalog number ngc 1073, is thought to be similar to our own milky way galaxy. here we see the giant wheel-shaped system with a bar of stars across its middle. (credit: nasa, esa) the sun is somewhat less than 30,000 light-years from the center of the galaxy, in a location with nothing much to distinguish it. from our position inside the milky way galaxy, we cannot see through to its far rim (at least not with ordinary light) because the space between the stars is not completely empty. it contains a sparse distribution of gas (mostly the simplest element, hydrogen) intermixed with tiny solid particles that we call interstellar dust.
this gas and dust collect into enormous clouds in many places in the galaxy, becoming the raw material for future generations of stars. figure 1.10 shows an image of the disk of the galaxy as seen from our vantage point. 1.6 • a tour of the universe 21 [image: astronomy_openstax_page39_img1.jpeg] figure 1.10 milky way galaxy. because we are inside the milky way galaxy, we see its disk in cross-section flung across the sky like a great milky white avenue of stars with dark “rifts” of dust. in this dramatic image, part of it is seen above trona pinnacles in the california desert. (credit: ian norman) typically, the interstellar material is so extremely sparse that the space between stars is a much better vacuum than anything we can produce in terrestrial laboratories. yet, the dust in space, building up over thousands of light-years, can block the light of more distant stars. like the distant buildings that disappear from our view on a smoggy day in los angeles, the more distant regions of the milky way cannot be seen behind the layers of interstellar smog.
luckily, astronomers have found that stars and raw material shine with various forms of light, some of which do penetrate the smog, and so we have been able to develop a pretty good map of the galaxy. recent observations, however, have also revealed a rather surprising and disturbing fact. there appears to be more—much more—to the galaxy than meets the eye (or the telescope). from various investigations, we have evidence that much of our galaxy is made of material we cannot currently observe directly with our instruments. we therefore call this component of the galaxy dark matter. we know the dark matter is there by the pull its gravity exerts on the stars and raw material we can observe, but what this dark matter is made of and how much of it exists remain a mystery. furthermore, this dark matter is not confined to our galaxy; it appears to be an important part of other star groupings as well. by the way, not all stars live by themselves, as the sun does. many are born in double or triple systems with two, three, or more stars revolving about each other. because the stars influence each other in such close systems, multiple stars allow us to measure characteristics that we cannot discern from observing single stars.