he was particularly disdainful of anyone who defended aristotle’s theory of falling bodies, which he felt he had completely disproven. galileo’s analysis was, of course, the first step toward modern physics. but it was in galileo’s nature to offend nearly everyone while taking that step. his position became untenable, and he was forced to go elsewhere. he got a similar position at the university of padua, which was part of the venetian republic, where he taught mathematics from 1592-1610. it was during this period that he completed his revision of terrestrial physics, including galilean relativity and the concept of inertia. but he chafed under the demands of teaching when he wanted to pursue his own interests. the course of his career suddenly changed when he got word that the venetian ambassador to holland had recently returned with a new toy invented by dutch spectacle-makers, a spyglass. galileo quickly understood its principles and set out to build his own, improved version.
this he did in 1609, and during the winter of 1609-10 made the first recorded telescopic observations of the night sky, and publicized them in the sidereus nuncius (the starry messenger, 1610). the book was instantly popular and went through additional printings, the renaissance version of a bestseller. galileo set up a workshop and hired artisans to build telescopes, which became a lucrative side business, because suddenly everybody wanted one. he even had one built for the doge of venice, who was intrigued by its potential for national defense. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page440_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 441 figure 483: dimostrazioni matematiche public domain within a year galileo’s observations were confirmed by a number of observers, including the renowned jesuit mathematician, christopher clavius, in rome. galileo was invited to rome and enjoyed celebrity status. he was received and recognized by pope paul v. the jesuits even published a chinese version at peking in 1616.
but while everyone agreed on what galileo observed, conflict arose when he used his observations to support heliocentrism. he got into arguments, and, again, his personality began to create enemies; his greatest allies, the jesuits, over time, became his greatest opponents. so what did galileo observe and what interpretations caused so much trouble? under the telescope, the moon was revealed to have earthlike features, including mountains and valleys. the surface of the sun was not the pristine orb lauded from earliest antiquity; instead it had black spots that moved across its face. the milky way was actually composed of thousands of faint stars. jupiter had “stars” of its own, that were clearly in motion around the much larger planet. and the planet venus went through phases, much like the moon did, which would clearly be impossible in the ptolemaic geocentric system. so galileo had observations that repudiated the old cosmology instituted by aristotle. but tycho brahe had also revealed problems with aristotle’s system with his observations of the supernova and the comet, yet did not support heliocentrism.
the phases of venus, which are devastating to geocentrism, are quite adequately dealt with in tycho’s geo-heliocentrism, and it has an unmoving earth at the center. it is perhaps only natural, then, that the jesuits championed tycho’s model over the copernican model, since religious tradition calls for an unmoving earth. galileo resorted to rhetorical ploys, hoping to shape the ongoing argument in terms of his choosing. he never addressed tycho’s system at all; he always made his case by contrasting geocentrism with heliocentrism. and he began to venture into the realm of theology by questioning whether the bible could or should be used as a source for scientific argument: “the bible tells us how to go to heaven, not how the heavens go.” making these arguments in a public letter to the grand duchess christina of tuscany, in 1615, brought the situation to a head. it was one thing to dispute among scholars; it was something else entirely when expressed in public.