(see the list of suggested online sites at the end of this chapter if you want to find out more about these other impact scars.) figure 8.21 meteor crater in arizona. here we see a 50,000-year-old impact crater made by the collision of a 40-meter lump of iron with our planet. although impact craters are common on less active bodies such as the moon, this is one of the very few well- link to learning 278 8 • earth as a planet access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page296_img1.jpeg] preserved craters on earth. (modification of work by d. roddy/usgs) mass extinction the impact that produced meteor crater would have been dramatic indeed to any humans who witnessed it (from a safe distance) since the energy release was equivalent to a 10-megaton nuclear bomb. but such explosions are devastating only in their local areas; they have no global consequences. much larger (and rarer) impacts, however, can disturb the ecological balance of the entire planet and thus influence the course of evolution.
the best-documented large impact took place 65 million years ago, at the end of what is now called the cretaceous period of geological history. this time in the history of life on earth was marked by a mass extinction, in which more than half of the species on our planet died out. there are a dozen or more mass extinctions in the geological record, but this particular event has always intrigued paleontologists because it marks the end of the dinosaur age. for tens of millions of years these great creatures had flourished and dominated. then, they suddenly disappeared (along with many other species), and thereafter mammals began the development and diversification that ultimately led to all of us. the object that collided with earth at the end of the cretaceous period struck a shallow sea in what is now the yucatán peninsula of mexico. its mass must have been more than a trillion tons, determined from study of a worldwide layer of sediment deposited from the dust cloud that enveloped the planet after its impact. first identified in 1979, this sediment layer is rich in the rare metal iridium and other elements that are relatively abundant in asteroids and comets, but exceedingly rare in earth’s crust.
even though it was diluted by the material that the explosion excavated from the surface of earth, this cosmic component can still be identified. in addition, this layer of sediment contains many minerals characteristic of the temperatures and pressures of a gigantic explosion. the impact that led to the extinction of dinosaurs released energy equivalent to 5 billion hiroshima-size nuclear bombs and excavated a crater 200 kilometers across and deep enough to penetrate through earth’s crust. this large crater, named chicxulub for a small town near its center, has subsequently been buried in sediment, but its outlines can still be identified (figure 8.22). the explosion that created the chicxulub crater lifted about 100 trillion tons of dust into the atmosphere. we can determine this amount by measuring the thickness of the sediment layer that formed when this dust settled to the surface. 8.5 • cosmic influences on the evolution of earth 279 figure 8.22 site of the chicxulub crater. this map shows the location of the impact crater created 65 million years ago on mexico’s yucatán peninsula. the crater is now buried under more than 500 meters of sediment.
(credit: modification of work by “carport”/wikimedia) such a quantity of airborne material would have blocked sunlight completely, plunging earth into a period of cold and darkness that lasted several months. many plants dependent on sunlight would have died, leaving plant-eating animals without a food supply. other worldwide effects included large-scale fires (started by the hot, flying debris from the explosion) that destroyed much of the planet’s forests and grasslands, and a long period in which rainwater around the globe was acidic. it was these environmental effects, rather than the explosion itself, that were responsible for the mass extinction, including the demise of the dinosaurs. impacts and the evolution of life it is becoming clear that many—perhaps most—mass extinctions in earth’s long history resulted from a variety of other causes, but in the case of the dinosaur killer, the cosmic impact certainly played a critical role and may have been the “final straw” in a series of climactic disturbances that resulted in the “great dying.” a catastrophe for one group of living things, however, may create opportunities for another group. following each mass extinction, there is a sudden evolutionary burst as new species develop to fill the ecological niches opened by the event.