the “brains” had significant “memory loss”: some of the onboard computer memory had failed. and the whole spacecraft was beginning to run out of energy: its generators had begun showing serious signs of wear. to make things even more of a challenge, voyager’s mission at neptune was in many ways the most difficult of all four flybys. for example, since sunlight at neptune is 900 times weaker than at earth, the onboard camera had to take much longer exposures in this light-starved environment. this was a nontrivial requirement, given that the spacecraft was hurtling by neptune at ten times the speed of a rifle bullet. the solution was to swivel the camera backward at exactly the rate that would compensate for the forward motion of the spacecraft. engineers had to preprogram the ship’s computer to execute an incredibly complex series of maneuvers for each image. the beautiful voyager images of neptune are a testament to the ingenuity of spacecraft engineers. the sheer distance of the craft from its controllers on earth was yet another challenge. voyager 2 received instructions and sent back its data via on-board radio transmitter. the distance from earth to neptune is about 4.8 billion kilometers.
over this vast distance, the power that reached us from voyager 2 at neptune was approximately10–16 watts, or 20 billion times less power than it takes to operate a digital watch. thirty- eight different antennas on four continents were used by nasa to collect the faint signals from the spacecraft and decode the precious information about neptune that they contained. enter the orbiters: galileo, cassini, and juno the pioneer and voyager missions were flybys of the giant planets: they each produced only quick looks before the spacecraft sped onward. for more detailed studies of these worlds, we require spacecraft that can go into orbit around a planet. for jupiter and saturn, these orbiters were the galileo, cassini, and juno spacecraft. to date, no orbiter missions have been started for uranus and neptune, although planetary scientists have expressed keen interest. the galileo spacecraft was launched toward jupiter in 1989 and arrived in 1995. galileo began its investigations by deploying an entry probe into jupiter, for the first direct studies of the planet’s outer atmospheric layers.
the probe plunged at a shallow angle into jupiter’s atmosphere, traveling at a speed of 50 kilometers per second—that’s fast enough to fly from new york to san francisco in 100 seconds! this was the highest speed at which any probe has so far entered the atmosphere of a planet, and it put great demands on the heat shield protecting it. the high entry speed was a result of acceleration by the strong gravitational attraction of jupiter. link to learning making connections 11.1 • exploring the outer planets 369 atmospheric friction slowed the probe within 2 minutes, producing temperatures at the front of its heat shield as high as 15,000 °c. as the probe’s speed dropped to 2500 kilometers per hour, the remains of the glowing heat shield were jettisoned, and a parachute was deployed to lower the instrumented probe spacecraft more gently into the atmosphere (figure 11.3). the data from the probe instruments were relayed to earth via the main galileo spacecraft. figure 11.3 galileo probe falling into jupiter and juno image of jupiter's south pole. (a) this artist’s depiction shows the galileo probe descending into the clouds via parachute just after the protective heat shield separated.
the probe made its measurements of jupiter’s atmosphere on december 7, 1995. (b) this juno image, taken in 2017 from about 100,000 kilometers above the cloudtops, shows the south polar region of jupiter with its dramatic complex of storms and clouds. the enhanced-color image was processed for nasa/jpl by citizen scientist john landino. (credit a: modification of work by nasa/ames research center; credit b: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/swri/msss/john landino) the probe continued to operate for an hour, descending 200 kilometers into the atmosphere. a few minutes later the polyester parachute melted, and within a few hours the main aluminum and titanium structure of the probe vaporized to become a part of jupiter itself. about 2 hours after receipt of the final probe data, the main spacecraft fired its retro-rockets so it could be captured into orbit around the planet, where its primary objectives were to study jupiter’s large and often puzzling moons. the cassini mission to saturn (figure 11.4), a cooperative venture between nasa and the european space agency, was similar to galileo in its two-fold approach.