[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page323_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page323_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 324 equation 25: mass of the milky way galaxy 𝑀𝑆𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑟 𝑀𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑠= (semi-major axis (in au))3 (orbital period (in yrs) )2 figure 387: the milky way galaxy rotation curve diagram by lemonbalmer component 150 – mass of the milky way galaxy we use radio telescopes to identify where the stars are in the milky way galaxy. but we want to know more than their current position. we want to know how massive the stars are. we know that from newton’s laws we can calculate the mass of the galaxy based on an object’s orbital period (rotation velocity) and the semi-major axis of its orbit. mass based on the sun’s orbit the sun orbits the milky way galaxy’s core in 225 million years. our distance from the core is 8,000 parsecs.
when you convert to au and plug in these values, you get a mass of 88 billion times the mass of the sun. the mass of the milky way galaxy, based on measurements using the sun is the mass of the material inside the sun’s orbit. there is additional mass in the milky way outside of the sun’s orbit. total mass of the galaxy and rotation curves to calculate the total mass you would need to do the same calculation for the object that is furthest from the core. by using radio telescopes, astronomers are able to measure dust and gas at different distances from the galactic core. when you plot this data, you get a rotation curve for the milky way galaxy. this is shown in the gray curve in figure 387. the other lines are for comparison. the blue is what kepler’s laws would predict. the green is the curve you would get for a solid body, and the red is where the velocity is held constant. the fact that the milky way galactic rotation curve actually approaches the flat velocity implies that there continues to be additional mass beyond what we can see. this mass is what we refer to as dark matter, and is discussed further in component 160.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page324_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 325 figure 388: the milky way galaxy structure diagram built by nasa from the wise mission data component 151 – milky way structure the milky way galaxy is a barred-spiral galaxy. since we are within the galaxy, the only way to see the entire structure is to generate it on the computer based on radio telescope data. for more information on the wise mission, visit: http://www.nasa.gov/wise [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page325_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 326 figure 390: parts of a spiral galaxy the sun is located on the orion spur figure 389: parts of a barred spiral galaxy the sun is located on the cygnus-orion spiral arm on the orion spur. the galaxy has two major arms, the scutum-centaurus arm and the perseus arm. additionally there are many minor branches throughout the disk. the sun is located 25 thousand light-years from the core, in a galaxy that spans 100 thousand light-years across.
the pink regions are emission nebulae that are star forming regions in the disk. there are many open star clusters also found in the disk and globular star clusters located in the galactic halo. as the galaxy ages, star formation moves outwards. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page326_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 327 figure 391: spiral arms component 152 – milky way spiral arms spiral galaxies have spiral arms. these arms contain billions of stars. each star, based on its mass, orbits the center of the galaxy at a specific velocity. just like the planets in our solar system, those closer to the center orbit more quickly than those farther out. if the spiral arms were static, then they would tighten over time as the inner stars completed more orbits than the outer stars. from what astronomers have observed this is not happening. there must be a different mechanism preserving the spiral arms. figure 391 shows a sequence of drawings by ingo berg that shows how spiral density waves moving through the disk could cause stability in the spiral structure while explaining the creation of new stars.