the hemisphere on the left includes the tharsis bulge and olympus mons, the highest mountain on mars; the hemisphere on the right includes the hellas basin, which has the lowest elevation on mars. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl) approximately half the planet consists of heavily cratered highland terrain, found primarily in the southern hemisphere. the other half, which is mostly in the north, contains younger, lightly cratered volcanic plains at an average elevation about 5 kilometers lower than the highlands. remember that we saw a similar pattern on earth, the moon, and venus. a geological division into older highlands and younger lowland plains seems to be characteristic of all the terrestrial planets except mercury. lying across the north-south division of mars is an uplifted continent the size of north america. this is the 10-kilometer-high tharsis bulge, a volcanic region crowned by four great volcanoes that rise still higher into the martian sky. volcanoes on mars the lowland plains of mars look very much like the lunar maria, and they have about the same density of impact craters. like the lunar maria, they probably formed between 3 and 4 billion years ago.
apparently, mars experienced extensive volcanic activity at about the same time the moon did, producing similar basaltic lavas. the largest volcanic mountains of mars are found in the tharsis area (you can see them in figure 10.17), although smaller volcanoes dot much of the surface. the most dramatic volcano on mars is olympus mons (mount olympus), with a diameter larger than 500 kilometers and a summit that towers more than 20 kilometers above the surrounding plains—three times higher than the tallest mountain on earth (figure 10.18). the volume of this immense volcano is nearly 100 times greater than that of mauna loa in hawaii. placed on earth’s surface, olympus would more than cover the entire state of missouri. 10.4 • the geology of mars 339 [image: astronomy_openstax_page357_img1.jpeg] figure 10.18 olympus mons. the largest volcano on mars, and probably the largest in the solar system, is olympus mons, illustrated in this computer-generated rendering based on data from the mars global surveyor’s laser altimeter.
placed on earth, the base of olympus mons would completely cover the state of missouri; the caldera, the circular opening at the top, is 65 kilometers across, about the size of los angeles. (credit: nasa/corbis) images taken from orbit allow scientists to search for impact craters on the slopes of these volcanoes in order to estimate their age. many of the volcanoes show a fair number of such craters, suggesting that they ceased activity a billion years or more ago. however, olympus mons has very, very few impact craters. its present surface cannot be more than about 100 million years old; it may even be much younger. some of the fresh- looking lava flows might have been formed a hundred years ago, or a thousand, or a million, but geologically speaking, they are quite young. this leads geologists to the conclusion that olympus mons possibly remains intermittently active today—something future mars land developers may want to keep in mind. martian cracks and canyons the tharsis bulge has many interesting geological features in addition to its huge volcanoes.
in this part of the planet, the surface itself has bulged upward, forced by great pressures from below, resulting in extensive tectonic cracking of the crust. among the most spectacular tectonic features on mars are the canyons called the valles marineris (or mariner valleys, named after mariner 9, which first revealed them to us), which are shown in figure 10.19. they extend for about 5000 kilometers (nearly a quarter of the way around mars) along the slopes of the tharsis bulge. if it were on earth, this canyon system would stretch all the way from los angeles to washington, dc. the main canyon is about 7 kilometers deep and up to 100 kilometers wide, large enough for the grand canyon of the colorado river to fit comfortably into one of its side canyons. viewers of the movie “the martian” can see a recreation of these canyonlands, as the film’s hero takes a long trip through a spectacular (and somewhat exaggerated) presentation of this part of mars. figure 10.19 heavily eroded canyonlands on mars.