if you stood at the north pole of earth, for example, you would see the north celestial pole overhead, at your zenith (figure 2.5). the celestial equator, 90° from the celestial poles, would lie along your horizon. as you watched the stars during the course of the night, they would all circle around the celestial pole, with none rising or setting. only that half of the sky north of the celestial equator is ever visible to an observer at the north pole. similarly, an observer at the south pole would see only the southern half of the sky. if you were at earth’s equator, on the other hand, you see the celestial equator (which, after all, is just an “extension” of earth’s equator) pass overhead through your zenith. the celestial poles, being 90° from the celestial equator, must then be at the north and south points on your horizon. as the sky turns, all stars rise and set; they move straight up from the east side of the horizon and set straight down on the west side. during a 24-hour period, all stars are above the horizon exactly half the time.
(of course, during some of those hours, the sun is too bright for us to see them.) what would an observer in the latitudes of the united states or europe see? remember, we are neither at earth’s pole nor at the equator, but in between them. for those in the continental united states and europe, the north celestial pole is neither overhead nor on the horizon, but in between. it appears above the northern horizon at an angular height, or altitude, equal to the observer’s latitude. in san francisco, for example, where the latitude is 38° n, the north celestial pole is 38° above the northern horizon. 36 2 • observing the sky: the birth of astronomy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page54_img1.jpeg] for an observer at 38° n latitude, the south celestial pole is 38° below the southern horizon and, thus, never visible. as earth turns, the whole sky seems to pivot about the north celestial pole. for this observer, stars within 38° of the north pole can never set. they are always above the horizon, day and night. this part of the sky is called the north circumpolar zone.
for observers in the continental united states, the big dipper, little dipper, and cassiopeia are examples of star groups in the north circumpolar zone. on the other hand, stars within 38° of the south celestial pole never rise. that part of the sky is the south circumpolar zone. to most u.s. observers, the southern cross is in that zone. (don’t worry if you are not familiar with the star groups just mentioned; we will introduce them more formally later on.) at this particular time in earth’s history, there happens to be a star very close to the north celestial pole. it is called polaris, the pole star, and has the distinction of being the star that moves the least amount as the northern sky turns each day. because it moved so little while the other stars moved much more, it played a special role in the mythology of several native american tribes, for example (some called it the “fastener of the sky”). what’s your angle? astronomers measure how far apart objects appear in the sky by using angles. by definition, there are 360° in a circle, so a circle stretching completely around the celestial sphere contains 360°.
the half-sphere or dome of the sky then contains 180° from horizon to opposite horizon. thus, if two stars are 18° apart, their separation spans about 1/10 of the dome of the sky. to give you a sense of how big a degree is, the full moon is about half a degree across. this is about the width of your smallest finger (pinkie) seen at arm’s length. rising and setting of the sun we described the movement of stars in the night sky, but what about during the daytime? the stars continue to circle during the day, but the brilliance of the sun makes them difficult to see. (the moon can often be seen in the daylight, however.) on any given day, we can think of the sun as being located at some position on the hypothetical celestial sphere. when the sun rises—that is, when the rotation of earth carries the sun above the horizon—sunlight is scattered by the molecules of our atmosphere, filling our sky with light and hiding the stars above the horizon. for thousands of years, astronomers have been aware that the sun does more than just rise and set. it changes position gradually on the celestial sphere, moving each day about 1° to the east relative to the stars.