so we have two options: either we find a new model for forming planets close to the searing heat of the parent star, or we find a way to change the orbits of planets originally formed in colder regions far from their parent starts, so that they can then travel inward after they form. most research now supports the latter explanation. there are two ways that giant planets could travel inward. calculations show that if a planet forms while a substantial amount of gas remains in the disk, then some of the planet’s orbital angular momentum can be transferred to the disk. as it loses momentum (through a process that reminds us of the effects of friction), the planet will spiral inward. this process can transport giant planets, initially formed in cold regions of the disk, closer to the central star—thereby producing hot jupiters. gravitational interactions between planets in the chaotic early solar system can also cause a newly formed giant planet to change its orbit to be more elliptical, carrying it into the hotter regions close to the star. once it is in that more crowded region, the same forces that we mentioned earlier (that remind us of friction) can then cause its orbit to become circular again, but in the hotter region much closer to the star.
in some cases, we can use the combination of transit plus doppler measurements to determine whether the planets orbit in the same plane and in the same direction as the star. for the first few cases, things seemed to work just as we anticipated: like the solar system, the gas giant planets orbited in their star’s equatorial plane and in the same direction as the spinning star. then, some startling discoveries were made of gas giant planets that orbited at right angles or even in the opposite sense as the spin of the star. how could this happen? again, there must have been interactions between planets. it’s possible that before the system settled down, two planets came close together, so that one was kicked into an unusual orbit. or perhaps a passing star perturbed the system after the planets were newly formed. forming planetary systems when the milky way galaxy was young, the stars that formed did not contain many heavy elements like iron. several generations of star formation and star death were required to enrich the interstellar medium for subsequent generations of stars. since planets seem to form “inside out,” starting with the accretion of the materials that can make the rocky cores with which planets start, astronomers wondered when in the history of the galaxy, planet formation would turn on.
the star kepler-444 has shed some light on this question. this is a tightly packed system of five planets—the smallest comparable in size to mercury and the largest similar in size to venus. all five planets were detected with the kepler spacecraft as they transited their parent star. all five planets orbit their host star in less than the time it takes mercury to complete one orbit about the sun. remarkably, the host star kepler-444 is more than 11 billion years old and formed when the milky way was only 2 billion years old. so the heavier elements 21.6 • new perspectives on planet formation 731 needed to make rocky planets must have already been available then. this ancient planetary system sets the clock on the beginning of rocky planet formation to be relatively soon after the formation of our galaxy. kepler data demonstrate that while rocky planets inside mercury’s orbit are missing from our solar system, they are common around other stars, like kepler-444. when the first systems packed with close-in rocky planets were discovered, we wondered why they were so different from our solar system. when many such systems were discovered, we began to wonder if it was our solar system that was different.
this led to speculation that additional rocky planets might once have existed close to the sun in our solar system. there is some evidence from the motions in the outer solar system that jupiter may have migrated inward long ago. if correct, then gravitational perturbations from jupiter could have dislodged the orbits of close-in rocky planets, causing them to fall into the sun. consistent with this picture, astronomers now think that uranus and neptune probably did not form at their present distances from the sun but rather closer to where jupiter and saturn are now. the reason for this idea is that density in the disk of matter surrounding the sun at the time the planets formed was so low outside the orbit of saturn that it would take several billion years to build up uranus and neptune. yet we saw earlier in the chapter that the disks around protostars survive only a few million years. therefore, scientists have developed computer models demonstrating that uranus and neptune could have formed near the current locations of jupiter and saturn, and then been kicked out to larger distances through gravitational interactions with their neighbors.