would data from just the nearest galaxies—in what astronomers call “the local group”—suffice?) 24. what does it mean if one elliptical galaxy has broader spectrum lines than another elliptical galaxy? 25. based on your analysis of galaxies in table 26.1, is there a correlation between the population of stars and the quantity of gas or dust? explain why this might be. 26. can a higher mass-to-light ratio mean that there is gas and dust present in the system that is being analyzed? figuring for yourself 27. according to hubble’s law, what is the recessional velocity of a galaxy that is 108 light-years away from us? (assume a hubble constant of 22 km/s per million light-years.) 28. a cluster of galaxies is observed to have a recessional velocity of 60,000 km/s. find the distance to the cluster. (assume a hubble constant of 22 km/s per million light-years.) 29. suppose we could measure the distance to a galaxy using one of the distance techniques listed in table 26.2 and it turns out to be 200 million light-years. the galaxy’s redshift tells us its recessional velocity is 5000 km/s.
what is the hubble constant? 30. calculate the mass-to-light ratio for a globular cluster with a luminosity of 106 lsun and 105 stars. (assume that the average mass of a star in such a cluster is 1 msun.) 31. calculate the mass-to-light ratio for a luminous star of 100 msun having the luminosity of 106 lsun. 926 26 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 27.1 hubble ultra-deep field. the deepest picture of the sky in visible light (left) shows huge numbers of galaxies in a tiny patch of sky, only 1/100 the area of the full moon. in contrast, the deepest picture of the sky taken in x-rays (right) shows large numbers of point-like quasars, which astronomers have shown are supermassive black holes at the very centers of galaxies. (credit left: modification of work by nasa, esa, h. teplitz and m. rafelski (ipac/caltech), a. koekemoer (stsci), r. windhorst (arizona state university), and z.
levay (stsci); credit right: modification of work by eso/mario nonino, piero rosati, eso goods team) chapter outline 27.1 quasars 27.2 supermassive black holes: what quasars really are 27.3 quasars as probes of evolution in the universe thinking ahead during the first half of the twentieth century, astronomers viewed the universe of galaxies as a mostly peaceful place. they assumed that galaxies formed billions of years ago and then evolved slowly as the populations of stars within them formed, aged, and died. that placid picture completely changed in the last few decades of the twentieth century. today, astronomers can see that the universe is often shaped by violent events, including cataclysmic explosions of supernovae, collisions of whole galaxies, and the tremendous outpouring of energy as matter interacts in the environment surrounding very massive black holes. the key event that began to change our view of the universe was the discovery of a new class of objects: quasars.
27.1 quasars learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the name “quasars” started out as short for “quasi-stellar radio sources” (here “quasi-stellar” means “sort of describe how quasars were discovered explain how astronomers determined that quasars are at the distances implied by their redshifts justify the statement that the enormous amount of energy produced by quasars is generated in a very small volume of space active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes 27 [image: astronomy_openstax_page945_img1.jpeg] like stars”). the discovery of radio sources that appeared point-like, just like stars, came with the use of surplus world war ii radar equipment in the 1950s. although few astronomers would have predicted it, the sky turned out to be full of strong sources of radio waves. as they improved the images that their new radio telescopes could make, scientists discovered that some radio sources were in the same location as faint blue “stars.” no known type of star in our galaxy emits such powerful radio radiation. what then were these “quasi-stellar radio sources”?