(credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl/cornell) chapter outline 10.1 the nearest planets: an overview 10.2 the geology of venus 10.3 the massive atmosphere of venus 10.4 the geology of mars 10.5 water and life on mars 10.6 divergent planetary evolution thinking ahead the moon and mercury are geologically dead. in contrast, the larger terrestrial planets—earth, venus, and mars—are more active and interesting worlds. we have already discussed earth, and we now turn to venus and mars. these are the nearest planets and the most accessible to spacecraft. not surprisingly, the greatest effort in planetary exploration has been devoted to these fascinating worlds. in the chapter, we discuss some of the results of more than four decades of scientific exploration of mars and venus. mars is exceptionally interesting, with evidence that points to habitable conditions in the past. even today, we are discovering things about mars that make it the most likely place where humans might set up a habitat in the future. however, our robot explorers have clearly shown that neither venus nor mars has conditions similar to earth.
how did it happen that these three neighboring terrestrial planets have diverged so dramatically in their evolution? 10.1 the nearest planets: an overview learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: explain why it’s difficult to learn about venus from earth-based observation alone describe the history of our interest in mars before the space age compare the basic physical properties of earth, mars, and venus, including their orbits earthlike planets: venus and mars 10 [image: astronomy_openstax_page339_img1.jpeg] as you might expect from close neighbors, mars and venus are among the brightest objects in the night sky. the average distance of mars from the sun is 227 million kilometers (1.52 au), or about half again as far from the sun as earth. venus’ orbit is very nearly circular, at a distance of 108 million kilometers (0.72 au) from the sun. like mercury, venus sometimes appears as an “evening star” and sometimes as a “morning star.” venus approaches earth more closely than does any other planet: at its nearest, it is only 40 million kilometers from us. the closest mars ever gets to earth is about 56 million kilometers.
appearance venus appears very bright, and even a small telescope reveals that it goes through phases like the moon. galileo discovered that venus displays a full range of phases, and he used this as an argument to show that venus must circle the sun and not earth. the planet’s actual surface is not visible because it is shrouded by dense clouds that reflect about 70% of the sunlight that falls on them, frustrating efforts to study the underlying surface, even with cameras in orbit around the planet (figure 10.2). figure 10.2 venus as photographed by the pioneer venus orbiter. this ultraviolet image shows an upper-atmosphere cloud structure that would be invisible at visible wavelengths. note that there is not even a glimpse of the planet’s surface. (credit: modification of work by nasa) in contrast, mars is more tantalizing as seen through a telescope (figure 10.3). the planet is distinctly red, due (as we now know) to the presence of iron oxides in its soil. this color may account for its association with war (and blood) in the legends of early cultures.
the best resolution obtainable from telescopes on the ground is about 100 kilometers, or about the same as what we can see on the moon with the unaided eye. at this resolution, no hint of topographic structure can be detected: no mountains, no valleys, not even impact craters. on the other hand, bright polar ice caps can be seen easily, together with dusky surface markings that sometimes change in outline and intensity from season to season. 322 10 • earthlike planets: venus and mars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page340_img1.jpeg] figure 10.3 mars as seen from earth’s surface. these are among the best earth-based photos of mars, taken in 1988 when the planet was exceptionally close to earth. the polar caps and dark surface markings are evident, but not topographic features. (credit: modification of work by steve larson, lunar and planetary laboratory, university of arizona) for a few decades around the turn of the twentieth century, some astronomers believed that they saw evidence of an intelligent civilization on mars.