fortunately, there is a handful of objects—such as isolated stars, star clusters, and satellite galaxies—beyond the visible edge that allows astronomers to estimate how much additional matter is hidden out there. recent studies show that the amount of dark matter beyond the visible edge of andromeda may be as large as the mass of the bright portion of the galaxy. indeed, using kepler’s third law and the velocities of its satellite galaxies, the andromeda galaxy is estimated to have a mass closer to msun. the mass of the milky way galaxy is estimated to be msun, and so our milky way is turning out to be somewhat smaller than andromeda. elliptical galaxies do not rotate in a systematic way, so we cannot determine a rotational velocity; therefore, we must use a slightly different technique to measure their mass. their stars are still orbiting the galactic center, but not in the organized way that characterizes spirals. since elliptical galaxies contain stars that are billions of years old, we can assume that the galaxies themselves are not flying apart.
therefore, if we can measure the various speeds with which the stars are moving in their orbits around the center of the galaxy, we can calculate how much mass the galaxy must contain in order to hold the stars within it. in practice, the spectrum of a galaxy is a composite of the spectra of its many stars, whose different motions produce different doppler shifts (some red, some blue). the result is that the lines we observe from the entire galaxy contain the combination of many doppler shifts. when some stars provide blueshifts and others provide redshifts, they create a wider or broader absorption or emission feature than would the same lines in a hypothetical galaxy in which the stars had no orbital motion. astronomers call this phenomenon line broadening. the amount by which each line broadens indicates the range of speeds at which the stars are moving with respect to the center of the galaxy. the range of speeds depends, in turn, on the force of gravity that holds the stars within the galaxies. with information about the speeds, it is possible to calculate the mass of an elliptical galaxy. table 26.1 summarizes the range of masses (and other properties) of the various types of galaxies. interestingly enough, the most and least massive galaxies are ellipticals.
on average, irregular galaxies have less mass than spirals. characteristics of the different types of galaxies characteristic spirals ellipticals irregulars mass (msun) 109 to 1012 105 to 1013 108 to 1011 diameter (thousands of light-years) 15 to 150 3 to >700 3 to 30 luminosity (lsun) 108 to 1011 106 to 1011 107 to 2 × 109 populations of stars old and young old old and young interstellar matter gas and dust almost no dust; little gas much gas; some have little dust, some much dust table 26.1 26.3 • properties of galaxies 907 characteristic spirals ellipticals irregulars mass-to-light ratio in the visible part 2 to 10 10 to 20 1 to 10 mass-to-light ratio for total galaxy 100 100 ? table 26.1 mass-to-light ratio a useful way of characterizing a galaxy is by noting the ratio of its mass (in units of the sun’s mass) to its light output (in units of the sun’s luminosity).
this single number tells us roughly what kind of stars make up most of the luminous population of the galaxy, and it also tells us whether a lot of dark matter is present. for stars like the sun, the mass-to-light ratio is 1 by our definition. galaxies are not, of course, composed entirely of stars that are identical to the sun. the overwhelming majority of stars are less massive and less luminous than the sun, and usually these stars contribute most of the mass of a system without accounting for very much light. the mass-to-light ratio for low-mass stars is greater than 1 (you can verify this using the data in table 18.3). therefore, a galaxy’s mass-to-light ratio is also generally greater than 1, with the exact value depending on the ratio of high-mass stars to low-mass stars. galaxies in which star formation is still occurring have many massive stars, and their mass-to-light ratios are usually in the range of 1 to 10. galaxies consisting mostly of an older stellar population, such as ellipticals, in which the massive stars have already completed their evolution and have ceased to shine, have mass-to-light ratios of 10 to 20.