henry draper (1837-1882) used yet another new technology – [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page460_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page460_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 461 figure 502: cannon and leavitt public domain photography – to record the spectrum of the star vega at harvard university. his successor, edward pickering (1846-1919), built a team at harvard that used advances in photographic methods combined with newer, more precise diffraction gratings to complete the henry draper catalogue of over 230,000 stellar spectra which quickly became an international standard (the hd catalogue). pickering’s team was unusual for its day, in that he employed women (“pickering’s harem” as they were dismissively referred to by his colleagues). at the height of the draper project, 80 women worked as “computers,” that is, they were responsible for the long, tedious, and boring computations that were thought to be too much drudgery for their male counterparts, and they were paid the grand sum of $0.25 per hour.
but out of all that repetition came an intimate knowledge of subtle variations and consistencies in the data, which bore unexpected fruit later on. one of those women was annie jump cannon (1863-1941), the daughter of a delaware state senator and shipbuilder. under the encouragement of her mother, cannon attended wellesley college to study astronomy, receiving a degree in physics in 1884. over the next decade she traveled widely and developed skill in the new art of photography. she joined pickering’s team in 1896. cannon early on in the project negotiated a compromise among various team members on how to classify the stars they were cataloguing. under her direction, stars would be divided into spectral classes designated as o, b, a, f, g, k, m. her scheme was based on the strength of the absorption lines in the visible spectrum of each star. it was cannon herself who came up with the mnemonic “oh be a fine girl, kiss me” as a way to remember the order of the spectral classes. during her lifetime, annie jump cannon manually classified 350,000 stars, more than anyone else in history.
one of cannon’s colleagues was henrietta swan leavitt (1868-1921), who was the daughter of a congregational minister in lancaster, massachusetts. she attended radcliffe college, graduating in 1892, where she got bit by the astronomy bug. she started work as a computer [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page461_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 462 for the draper project in 1893, and was later assigned by pickering to focus on variable stars. the work was long and difficult because several photographic plates taken over time were needed just to determine that a star was a variable. but after 15 years of analysis, in 1908 she concluded that stars in the magellanic clouds (minor galaxies visible in the southern hemisphere) contained many variable stars, some of which exhibited interesting regularities. since these stars were grouped together in the cloud, she assumed as an approximation that they were all equidistant from the earth, which meant that variations in brightness must be due to the stars themselves and not to differences in their distance from the earth.
for a particular class of variables, called cepheid variables (first discovered in 1784 by astronomer john goodricke for the star delta cephei), she found that the intensity of the cepheid was directly related to the period of its variation: the brighter the cepheid, the longer it took for it to cycle from maximum to minimum to maximum again. by 1912 she had additional corroborating data and published her findings. her discovery, known now as the period-luminosity law, made it possible to determine stellar distances without resorting to stellar parallax. leavitt’s law was the first “standard candle,” meaning that a measure of the period and intensity of any cepheid anywhere could be compared to a known standard, and distance to that cepheid could then be determined quickly and easily, a fact that astronomer edwin hubble would later use to his distinct advantage. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 463 figure 503: hr diagram diagram by eso another result of the draper project was the classification system developed by henry norris russell (1877-1957), and danish astronomer ejnar hertzsprung (1873-1967).