we use the doppler effect in our daily lives when the police use radar detectors to measure our speed, and when the weathermen measure the motion of raindrops in a thunderstorm. we use a common line in the spectra with a known wavelength, such as the balmer series hydrogen-alpha: 656.3 nm. we measure the apparent wavelength from the lines that appear in spectra. we can then combine this radial velocity with the transverse velocity that we can measure from images and we can calculate the object’s true motion. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 104 figure 141: light from a rotating star component 32 – the language of light there are many things that we can learn about an object by studying its spectrum. this is a summary of the things we can measure and what they tell us. peak frequency – the temperature of the object. by determining the peak frequency of the light emitted from an object we can tell its surface temperature. some stars are so hot that their peak temperature is not in the visible part of the spectrum; it is in the ultraviolet. doppler shift – the recession velocity of the object. a change in the frequency of known lines in the spectrum tells us the recession velocity of the object.
this is especially useful when combined with hubble’s law for distant galaxies. presence of lines – the composition of the object. every element has a unique signature; a unique set of lines. by deciphering those lines it is possible to identify individual elements and molecules present in the object or an intervening dust cloud. these lines may be present outside of the visible part of the spectrum. they could be radio, infrared, visible, or ultraviolet. width of the lines – rotation, temperature, turbulence, magnetic field. lines have different widths depending on the environment where they were born. many different factors have an impact on line width. if an object is rotating, one side of the object will be red-shifted. the other side will be blue-shifted. these effects from across the disk of the object combine to create broader lines centered on the frequency of the line. higher temperatures cause the atoms and molecules to move faster. if they are moving away from the observer when they emit their photons then the light will be red-shifted. otherwise they will be blue-shifted. the combination of all these photons will yield a broader line. turbulence works the same way. magnetic fields have the effect of creating multiple lines for each transition.
often these lines are so close together that they appear as broader lines. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page104_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 105 component 33 – how far is that? measuring the distance to an object is an important part of astronomy. depending on how far away the object is, different techniques are needed to measure the distance. on earth, we can use a tape measure to determine a distance, but sometimes the distances are still too great to measure them manually. when this is the case, there are technological solutions we can use. there are also many different techniques for measuring astronomical distances. the distance tools we will discuss 7 different techniques used to measure astronomical distances. inside the solar system table 7 shows the distances that are measureable by each of the techniques we will discuss. inside the solar system we measure distances in aus. the oort cloud, in the most distant reaches of the solar system, is at a distance of roughly a light-year. this means that radar and stellar parallax will meet our needs.
table 7: measuring astronomical distances technique minimum distance maximum distance radar 0 10 au stellar parallax 0 660 light-years spectroscopic parallax 0 66,000 light-years cepheid variable stars 100 light-years 10 million light-years tully-fisher relation 1 million light-years 1 billion light-years type ia supernovae 1 million light-years 3.3 billion light-years hubble's law 660 million light-years (no upper limit) equation 7: measuring distance with velocity velocity: 𝑉𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦= 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒∗𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 distance: 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒= 𝑉𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 velocity is the speed of light astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 106 radar.