it was actually the first evidence that gravitational influences exist outside the solar system. the orbital motion of a binary star is shown in figure 18.4. a binary star system in which both of the stars can be seen with a telescope is called a visual binary. distinguish the different types of binary star systems understand how we can apply newton’s version of kepler’s third law to derive the sum of star masses in a binary star system apply the relationship between stellar mass and stellar luminosity to determine the physical characteristics of a star 18.2 • measuring stellar masses 607 figure 18.4 revolution of a binary star. this figure shows seven observations of the mutual revolution of two stars, one a brown dwarf and one an ultra-cool l dwarf. each red dot on the orbit, which is shown by the blue ellipse, corresponds to the position of one of the dwarfs relative to the other. the reason that the pair of stars looks different on the different dates is that some images were taken with the hubble space telescope and others were taken from the ground. the arrows point to the actual observations that correspond to the positions of each red dot.
from these observations, an international team of astronomers directly measured the mass of an ultra-cool brown dwarf star for the first time. barely the size of the planet jupiter, the dwarf star weighs in at just 8.5% of the mass of our sun. (credit: modification of work by esa/nasa and herve bouy (max-planck-institut für extraterrestrische physik/ eso, germany)) edward c. pickering (1846–1919), at harvard, discovered a second class of binary stars in 1889—a class in which only one of the stars is actually seen directly. he was examining the spectrum of mizar and found that the dark absorption lines in the brighter star’s spectrum were usually double. not only were there two lines where astronomers normally saw only one, but the spacing of the lines was constantly changing. at times, the lines even became single. pickering correctly deduced that the brighter component of mizar, called mizar a, is itself really two stars that revolve about each other in a period of 104 days.
a star like mizar a, which appears as a single star when photographed or observed visually through the telescope, but which spectroscopy shows really to be a double star, is called a spectroscopic binary. mizar, by the way, is a good example of just how complex such star systems can be. mizar has been known for centuries to have a faint companion called alcor, which can be seen without a telescope. mizar and alcor form an optical double—a pair of stars that appear close together in the sky but do not orbit each other. through a telescope, as riccioli discovered in 1650, mizar can be seen to have another, closer companion that does orbit it; mizar is thus a visual binary. the two components that make up this visual binary, known as mizar a and mizar b, are both spectroscopic binaries. so, mizar is really a quadruple system of stars. strictly speaking, it is not correct to describe the motion of a binary star system by saying that one star orbits the other. gravity is a mutual attraction. each star exerts a gravitational force on the other, with the result that both stars orbit a point between them called the center of mass.
imagine that the two stars are seated at either end of a seesaw. the point at which the fulcrum would have to be located in order for the seesaw to balance is the center of mass, and it is always closer to the more massive star (figure 18.5). 608 18 • the stars: a celestial census access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page626_img1.jpeg] figure 18.5 binary star system. in a binary star system, both stars orbit their center of mass. the image shows the relative positions of two, different-mass stars from their center of mass, similar to how two masses would have to be located on a seesaw in order to keep it level. the star with the higher mass will be found closer to the center of mass, while the star with the lower mass will be farther from it. figure 18.6 shows two stars (a and b) moving around their center of mass, along with one line in the spectrum of each star that we observe from the system at different times. when one star is approaching us relative to the center of mass, the other star is receding from us.