but in those days, before the telescope, no one imagined testing these predictions. 56 2 • observing the sky: the birth of astronomy access for free at openstax.org figure 2.18 phases of venus. as venus moves around the sun, we see changing illumination of its surface, just as we see the face of the moon illuminated differently in the course of a month. this animation (https://openstax.org/l/30venusphases) shows the phases of venus. you can also see its distance from earth as it orbits the sun. galileo and the beginning of modern science many of the modern scientific concepts of observation, experimentation, and the testing of hypotheses through careful quantitative measurements were pioneered by a man who lived nearly a century after copernicus. galileo galilei (figure 2.19), a contemporary of shakespeare, was born in pisa. like copernicus, he began training for a medical career, but he had little interest in the subject and later switched to mathematics. he held faculty positions at the university of pisa and the university of padua, and eventually became mathematician to the grand duke of tuscany in florence.
figure 2.19 galileo galilei (1564–1642). galileo advocated that we perform experiments or make observations to ask nature its ways. when galileo turned the telescope to the sky, he found things were not the way philosophers had supposed. link to learning 2.4 • the birth of modern astronomy 57 [image: astronomy_openstax_page75_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page75_img2.jpeg] galileo’s greatest contributions were in the field of mechanics, the study of motion and the actions of forces on bodies. it was familiar to all persons then, as it is to us now, that if something is at rest, it tends to remain at rest and requires some outside influence to start it in motion. rest was thus generally regarded as the natural state of matter. galileo showed, however, that rest is no more natural than motion. if an object is slid along a rough horizontal floor, it soon comes to rest because friction between it and the floor acts as a retarding force. however, if the floor and the object are both highly polished, the object, given the same initial speed, will slide farther before stopping. on a smooth layer of ice, it will slide farther still.
galileo reasoned that if all resisting effects could be removed, the object would continue in a steady state of motion indefinitely. he argued that a force is required not only to start an object moving from rest but also to slow down, stop, speed up, or change the direction of a moving object. you will appreciate this if you have ever tried to stop a rolling car by leaning against it, or a moving boat by tugging on a line. galileo also studied the way objects accelerate—change their speed or direction of motion. galileo watched objects as they fell freely or rolled down a ramp. he found that such objects accelerate uniformly; that is, in equal intervals of time they gain equal increments in speed. galileo formulated these newly found laws in precise mathematical terms that enabled future experimenters to predict how far and how fast objects would move in various lengths of time. in theory, if galileo is right, a feather and a hammer, dropped at the same time from a height, should land at the same moment. on earth, this experiment is not possible because air resistance and air movements make the feather flutter, instead of falling straight down, accelerated only by the force of gravity.
for generations, physics teachers had said that the place to try this experiment is somewhere where there is no air, such as the moon. in 1971, apollo 15 astronaut david scott took a hammer and feather to the moon and tried it, to the delight of physics nerds everywhere. nasa provides the video of the hammer and feather (https://openstax.org/l/30hamvsfeath) as well as a brief explanation. sometime in the 1590s, galileo adopted the copernican hypothesis of a heliocentric solar system. in roman catholic italy, this was not a popular philosophy, for church authorities still upheld the ideas of aristotle and ptolemy, and they had powerful political and economic reasons for insisting that earth was the center of creation. galileo not only challenged this thinking but also had the audacity to write in italian rather than scholarly latin, and to lecture publicly on those topics. for him, there was no contradiction between the authority of the church in matters of religion and morality, and the authority of nature (revealed by experiments) in matters of science.