alas, the “face on mars” story is only one example of a whole series of conspiracy theories that are kept before the public by dedicated believers, by people out to make a fast buck, and by irresponsible media attention. others include the “urban legend” that the air force has the bodies of extraterrestrials at a secret base, the widely circulated report that ufos crashed near roswell, new mexico (actually it was a balloon carrying scientific instruments to find evidence of soviet nuclear tests), or the notion that alien astronauts helped build the egyptian pyramids and many other ancient monuments because our ancestors were too stupid to do it alone. in response to the increase in publicity given to these “fiction science” ideas, a group of scientists, educators, scholars, and magicians (who know a good hoax when they see one) have formed the committee for skeptical inquiry. two of the original authors of your book are active on the committee. for more information about its work delving into the rational explanations for paranormal claims, see their excellent magazine, the skeptical inquirer, or check out their website at https://skepticalinquirer.org/ (https://skepticalinquirer.org/).
climate change on mars the evidence about ancient rivers and lakes of water on mars discussed so far suggests that, billions of years ago, martian temperatures must have been warmer and the atmosphere must have been more substantial than it is today. but what could have changed the climate on mars so dramatically? we presume that, like earth and venus, mars probably formed with a higher surface temperature thanks to the greenhouse effect. but mars is a smaller planet, and its lower gravity means that atmospheric gases could escape more easily than from earth and venus. as more and more of the atmosphere escaped into space, the temperature on the surface gradually fell. eventually mars became so cold that most of the water froze out of the atmosphere, further reducing its ability to retain heat. the planet experienced a sort of runaway refrigerator effect, just the opposite of the runaway greenhouse effect that occurred on venus. probably, this loss of atmosphere took place within less than a billion years after mars formed. the result is the cold, dry mars we see today. conditions a few meters below the martian surface, however, may be much different. there, liquid water (especially salty water) might persist, kept warm by the internal heat of mars or the insulating layers solid and rock.
even on the surface, there may be ways to change the martian atmosphere temporarily. mars is likely to experience long-term climate cycles, which may be caused by the changing orbit and tilt of the planet. at times, one or both of the polar caps might melt, releasing a great deal of water vapor into the atmosphere. perhaps an occasional impact by a comet might produce a temporary atmosphere that is thick enough to permit liquid water on the surface for a few weeks or months. some have even suggested that future technology might allow us to terraform mars—that is, to engineer its atmosphere and climate in ways that might make the planet more hospitable for long-term human habitation. the search for life on mars if there was running water on mars in the past, perhaps there was life as well. could life, in some form, remain in the martian soil today? testing this possibility, however unlikely, was one of the primary objectives of the viking landers in 1976. these landers carried miniature biological laboratories to test for microorganisms in the martian soil.
martian soil was scooped up by the spacecraft’s long arm and placed into the experimental chambers, where it was isolated and incubated in contact with a variety of gases, radioactive isotopes, and nutrients to see what would happen. the experiments looked for evidence of respiration by living animals, 10.5 • water and life on mars 353 absorption of nutrients offered to organisms that might be present, and an exchange of gases between the soil and its surroundings for any reason whatsoever. a fourth instrument pulverized the soil and analyzed it carefully to determine what organic (carbon-bearing) material it contained. the viking experiments were so sensitive that, had one of the spacecraft landed anywhere on earth (with the possible exception of antarctica), it would easily have detected life. but, to the disappointment of many scientists and members of the public, no life was detected on mars. the soil tests for absorption of nutrients and gas exchange did show some activity, but this was most likely caused by chemical reactions that began as water was added to the soil and had nothing to do with life. in fact, these experiments showed that martian soil seems much more chemically active than terrestrial soils because of its exposure to solar ultraviolet radiation (since mars has no ozone layer).