to observer b, in a direction at right angles to the motion of the source, no effect is observed. the wavelength and frequency remain the same as they were in part (a) of the figure. we can see from this illustration that the doppler effect is produced only by a motion toward or away from the observer, a motion called radial velocity. sideways motion does not produce such an effect. observers between a and b would observe some shortening of the light waves for that part of the motion of the source that is along their line of sight. observers between b and c would observe lengthening of the light waves that 170 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page188_img1.jpeg] are along their line of sight. you may have heard the doppler effect with sound waves. when a train whistle or police siren approaches you and then moves away, you will notice a decrease in the pitch (which is how human senses interpret sound wave frequency) of the sound waves. compared to the waves at rest, they have changed from slightly more frequent when coming toward you, to slightly less frequent when moving away from you.
a nice example of this change in the sound of a train whistle can be heard at the end of the classic beach boys song “caroline, no” on their album pet sounds. to hear this sound, go to this youtube (https://openstax.org/l/30bbtrain) version of the song. the sound of the train begins at approximately 2:20. color shifts when the source of waves moves toward you, the wavelength decreases a bit. if the waves involved are visible light, then the colors of the light change slightly. as wavelength decreases, they shift toward the blue end of the spectrum: astronomers call this a blueshift (since the end of the spectrum is really violet, the term should probably be violetshift, but blue is a more common color). when the source moves away from you and the wavelength gets longer, we call the change in colors a redshift. because the doppler effect was first used with visible light in astronomy, the terms “blueshift” and “redshift” became well established. today, astronomers use these words to describe changes in the wavelengths of radio waves or x-rays as comfortably as they use them to describe changes in visible light.
the greater the motion toward or away from us, the greater the doppler shift. if the relative motion is entirely along the line of sight, the formula for the doppler shift of light is where λ is the wavelength emitted by the source, δλ is the difference between λ and the wavelength measured by the observer, c is the speed of light, and v is the relative speed of the observer and the source in the line of sight. the variable v is counted as positive if the velocity is one of recession, and negative if it is one of approach. solving this equation for the velocity, we find v = c × δλ/λ. click-and-drag the object emitting waves or the object receiving waves in this simulator (https://openstax.org/l/30doppsim) to experiment with the doppler effect yourself. the plots along the top show how the detected wavelengths change if the objects are approaching each other or moving further apart. if a star approaches or recedes from us, the wavelengths of light in its continuous spectrum appear shortened or lengthened, respectively, as do those of the dark lines.
however, unless its speed is tens of thousands of kilometers per second, the star does not appear noticeably bluer or redder than normal. the doppler shift is thus not easily detected in a continuous spectrum and cannot be measured accurately in such a spectrum. the wavelengths of the absorption lines can be measured accurately, however, and their doppler shift is relatively simple to detect. link to learning link to learning 5.6 • the doppler effect 171 e x a m p l e 5 . 6 the doppler effect we can use the doppler effect equation to calculate the radial velocity of an object if we know three things: the speed of light, the original (unshifted) wavelength of the light emitted, and the difference between the wavelength of the emitted light and the wavelength we observe. for particular absorption or emission lines, we usually know exactly what wavelength the line has in our laboratories on earth, where the source of light is not moving. we can measure the new wavelength with our instruments at the telescope, and so we know the difference in wavelength due to doppler shifting. since the speed of light is a universal constant, we can then calculate the radial velocity of the star.