488 14 • cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page506_img1.jpeg] figure 14.12 chemical condensation sequence in the solar nebula. the scale along the bottom shows temperature; above are the materials that would condense out at each temperature under the conditions expected to prevail in the nebula. far from the sun, cooler temperatures allowed the oxygen to combine with hydrogen and condense in the form of water (h2o) ice. beyond the orbit of saturn, carbon and nitrogen combined with hydrogen to make ices such as methane (ch4) and ammonia (nh3). this sequence of events explains the basic chemical composition differences among various regions of the solar system. e x a m p l e 1 4 . 1 rotation of the solar nebula we can use the concept of angular momentum to trace the evolution of the collapsing solar nebula. the angular momentum of an object is proportional to the square of its size (diameter) divided by its period of rotation . if angular momentum is conserved, then any change in the size of a nebula must be compensated for by a proportional change in period, in order to keep constant.
suppose the solar nebula began with a diameter of 10,000 au and a rotation period of 1 million years. what is its rotation period when it has shrunk to the size of pluto’s orbit, which appendix f tells us has a radius of about 40 au? solution we are given that the final diameter of the solar nebula is about 80 au. noting the initial state before the collapse and the final state at pluto’s orbit, then with pinitial equal to 1,000,000 years, pfinal, the new rotation period, is 64 years. this is a lot shorter than the actual time pluto takes to go around the sun, but it gives you a sense of the kind of speeding up the conservation of angular momentum can produce. as we noted earlier, other mechanisms helped the material in the disk lose angular momentum before the planets fully formed. 14.3 • formation of the solar system 489 [image: astronomy_openstax_page507_img1.jpeg] check your learning what would the rotation period of the nebula in our example be when it had shrunk to the size of jupiter’s orbit? answer: the period of the rotating nebula is inversely proportional to .
as we have just seen, initially, we have pinitial = 106 yr and dinitial = 104 au. then, if dfinal is in au, pfinal (in years) is given by if jupiter’s orbit has a radius of 5.2 au, then the diameter is 10.4 au. the period is then 1.08 years. formation of the terrestrial planets the grains that condensed in the solar nebula rather quickly joined into larger and larger chunks, until most of the solid material was in the form of planetesimals, chunks a few kilometers to a few tens of kilometers in diameter. some planetesimals still survive today as comets and asteroids. others have left their imprint on the cratered surfaces of many of the worlds we studied in earlier chapters. a substantial step up in size is required, however, to go from planetesimal to planet. some planetesimals were large enough to attract their neighbors gravitationally and thus to grow by the process called accretion. while the intermediate steps are not well understood, ultimately several dozen centers of accretion seem to have grown in the inner solar system. each of these attracted surrounding planetesimals until it had acquired a mass similar to that of mercury or mars.
at this stage, we may think of these objects as protoplanets—“not quite ready for prime time” planets. each of these protoplanets continued to grow by the accretion of planetesimals. every incoming planetesimal was accelerated by the gravity of the protoplanet, striking with enough energy to melt both the projectile and a part of the impact area. soon the entire protoplanet was heated to above the melting temperature of rocks. the result was planetary differentiation, with heavier metals sinking toward the core and lighter silicates rising toward the surface. as they were heated, the inner protoplanets lost some of their more volatile constituents (the lighter gases), leaving more of the heavier elements and compounds behind. formation of the giant planets in the outer solar system, where the available raw materials included ices as well as rocks, the protoplanets grew to be much larger, with masses ten times greater than earth. these protoplanets of the outer solar system were so large that they were able to attract and hold the surrounding gas. as the hydrogen and helium rapidly collapsed onto their cores, the giant planets were heated by the energy of contraction.