the smoother thin curve in each panel shows the predicted signal, based on einstein’s general theory of relativity, produced by the merger of two black holes. the bottom panel shows a superposition of the waves detected at the two ligo observatories. note the remarkable agreement of the two independent observations and of the observations with theory. (b) the painting shows an artist’s impression of two massive black holes spiraling inward toward an eventual merger. (credit a, b: modification of work by sxs) this detection by ligo (and another one of a different black hole merger a few months later) opened a whole new window on the universe. one of the experimenters compared the beginning of gravitational wave astronomy to the era when silent films were replaced by movies with sound (comparing the vibration of spacetime during the passing of a gravitational wave to the vibrations that sound makes).
852 24 • black holes and curved spacetime access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page870_img1.jpeg] direct observations: many more by the end of 2021, the ligo-virgo collaboration (virgo is a gravitational wave detector operated by the european gravitational observatory in italy) published a catalog that included some 90 events. by the end of 2024, scientists had more than 200 events to study. most were mergers of two black holes, and most involved black holes with a range of masses detected only by gravitational waves (see figure 24.19). in one extreme merger, black holes with masses of 86 and 65 times the mass of the sun merged to form a black hole with a mass of about 142 times the mass the sun, and released gravitational-wave energy equivalent to 9 times the mass of our sun (remember e = mc2)—an enormous amount. astronomers are not yet sure how black holes in this unexpected mass range form.
bear in mind that the kind of black holes in binary star systems that we discussed in evidence for black holes (and listed in table 24.1) have masses ranging from 4 to 15 times the mass of the sun. to be sure, a few mergers did involve black holes with stellar masses comparable to those of black holes in x- ray binary systems. in one case, for example, the merging black holes had masses of 14 and 8 times the mass of the sun. while astronomers can learn about the masses of objects involved in gravitational wave events, the challenge is to locate the event in the sky precisely. a single gravitational wave detector cannot determine accurately the direction to a gravitational wave source. four comparable detectors operating simultaneously are required to localize a source of gravitational waves in every location in the sky. the first observing run with four detectors, including the two ligo detectors, virgo, and kagra in japan, is scheduled to begin in the summer of 2022. ligo india will be a fifth, thereby enhancing the probability that at least four detectors will be operational simultaneously. experience has shown that the ligo and virgo detectors are down about 25 percent of the time because these complex systems are difficult to run.
a three-observatory network does provide a sharp location for events that occur in about half of all possible locations on the sky. in late 2017, data from the ligo and virgo detectors provided an accurate position for what analysis showed was the spiraling together of two neutron stars with masses of 1.1 to 1.6 times the mass of the sun (see the death of stars). with an accurate location known, follow up observations with ground-based telescopes detected electromagnetic emission from a gravitational wave event for the first time. the observations showed that this source was located in ngc 4993, a galaxy at a distance of about 130 million light-years in the direction of the constellation hydra. the fermi satellite detected a flash of gamma rays at the same time and in the same direction, which confirms the long-standing hypothesis that mergers of neutron stars are progenitors of short gamma-ray bursts (see the mystery of gamma-ray bursts). spectra showed that the merger ejected material with a mass of about 6 percent of the mass of the sun at a speed of one-tenth the speed of light. this material is rich in heavy elements, just as the theory of kilonovas (see the mystery of gamma-ray bursts) predicted.