suppose a star at a distance of 20 light-hours from the center of the galaxy has an orbital speed of 6200 km/s. how much mass must be located inside its orbit? 26. the next step in deciding whether the object in exercise 25.25 is a black hole is to estimate the density of this mass. assume that all of the mass is spread uniformly throughout a sphere with a radius of 20 light- hours. what is the density in kg/km3? (remember that the volume of a sphere is given by .) explain why the density might be even higher than the value you have calculated. how does this density compare with that of the sun or other objects we have talked about in this book? 27. suppose the sagittarius dwarf galaxy merges completely with the milky way and adds 150,000 stars to it. estimate the percentage change in the mass of the milky way. will this be enough mass to affect the orbit of the sun around the galactic center? assume that all of the sagittarius galaxy’s stars end up in the nuclear bulge of the milky way galaxy and explain your answer.
896 25 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 26.1 spiral galaxy. known by its catalog number ic5332, this spiral galaxy, seen nearly face on, is about 30 million light-years away in the constellation of sculptor. on the left, we see a visible light and ultraviolet image taken with the hubble space telescope. the glow comes mainly from bright stars, organized into a grand spiral shape, with lanes of dust showing as dark regions among the shining stars. on the right, the same galaxy is seen with the james webb space telescope’s mid-infrared instrument, which operates at a temperature of only 7 degrees above absolute zero. in this wavelength range, the dust is transparent, and we see mainly tangles of stars that are cooler, older, and dimmer than our sun. note the far greater complexity in the galaxy’s spiral structure in this image. (credit: modification of work by esa/webb, nasa & csa, j.
lee and the phangs-jwst and phangs-hst teams) chapter outline 26.1 the discovery of galaxies 26.2 types of galaxies 26.3 properties of galaxies 26.4 the extragalactic distance scale 26.5 the expanding universe thinking ahead in the last chapter, we explored our own galaxy. but is it the only one? if there are others, are they like the milky way? how far away are they? can we see them? as we shall learn, some galaxies turn out to be so far away that it has taken billions of years for their light to reach us. these remote galaxies can tell us what the universe was like when it was young. in this chapter, we start our exploration of the vast realm of galaxies. like tourists from a small town making their first visit to the great cities of the world, we will be awed by the beauty and variety of the galaxies. and yet, we will recognize that much of what we see is not so different from our experiences at home, and we will be impressed by how much we can learn by looking at structures built long ago.
we begin our voyage with a guide to the properties of galaxies, much as a tourist begins with a guidebook to the main features of the cities on the itinerary. in later chapters, we will look more carefully at the past history of galaxies, how they have changed over time, and how they acquired their many different forms. first, we’ll begin our voyage through the galaxies with the question: is our galaxy the only one? galaxies 26 [image: astronomy_openstax_page915_img1.jpeg] 26.1 the discovery of galaxies learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: growing up at a time when the hubble space telescope orbits above our heads and giant telescopes are springing up on the great mountaintops of the world, you may be surprised to learn that we were not sure about the existence of other galaxies for a very long time. the very idea that other galaxies exist used to be controversial. even into the 1920s, many astronomers thought the milky way encompassed all that exists in the universe. the evidence found in 1924 that meant our galaxy is not alone was one of the great scientific discoveries of the twentieth century. it was not that scientists weren’t asking questions.