the sun is fusing hydrogen into helium. this process creates pressure. the core temperature is almost 16 million k. hydrostatic equilibrium during a human lifetime, the sun does not change significantly. on average, the mass, radius, luminosity, and temperature do not vary. this means that the outward pressure of the fusion (green arrows in figure 280) is balanced with the inward pressure due to gravity (orange arrows in figure 280) in a main sequence star like the sun. this is called hydrostatic equilibrium. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page239_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page239_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 240 figure 282: the sun's corona figure 281: radiation inside the sun the radiation zone the radiation zone of the sun is that layer inside the sun where the sun’s energy moves outward from the core through the process of radiation. this means the energy is moved from the core outwards by electromagnetic radiation. the convection zone the convection zone of the sun is the layer above the radiation zone. here the sun’s energy is moved upwards through the motion of the material of the sun.
this zone is very similar to a boiling pot of water on the stove. hotter material rises and cooler material sinks towards the core. the photosphere the sun’s photosphere is a level above the convection zone. this is the part that we normally consider to be the surface of the sun. this is the part we see in telescopes with white light solar filters. the chromosphere the chromosphere is the layer of the sun above the photosphere. this is the lowest layer of the sun’s atmosphere. it is the layer with the lowest temperature. this is the layer that is visible with an h-alpha solar telescope. the transition zone the transition zone is the middle layer of the sun’s atmosphere. in this relatively narrow layer, the temperature changes from the lowness of the chromosphere to the very hot corona. the corona the corona is the outer layer of the sun’s atmosphere. the temperature here is very hot, but the gas is low-density. this layer is only visible during total solar eclipses.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page240_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page240_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 241 figure 284: detailed solar structure diagram by kelvinsong figure 283: solar vibrations diagram by the us government the solar wind the solar wind is the last part of the sun. this is the region from the corona to the edge of the sun’s push due to the solar wind, the heliopause. the solar wind is charged particles leaving the sun and moving quickly outward into the solar system. helioseismology how do we know what is going on inside the sun? on earth we learn about the layers inside our planet by studying the results of seismology studies. on the sun, it is not possible to place seismographs on the surface. and if we could, are there sunquakes that we can listen for to understand the structure? the answer to this last question is yes! there are very complex vibrations occurring on the sun. they are similar to the ringing of bells. we are able to detect these vibrations and analyze the data.
these complex waves can be broken down into their component waves, and these waves tell us about the internal structure of the sun. in the same way that different types of seismic waves on earth bounce off the different layers in the earth, so too will the different types of seismic waves bounce off the different layers in the sun. note the path that photons follow to leave the sun. in the radiation zone the photon passes from one atom to the next. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page241_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page241_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 242 solar observation is the only dangerous observing that astronomers do: never look at the sun! figure 285: granulation figure 286: sunspots component 101 – the sun’s surface the surface of the sun that we see depends on the frequency of the light we are looking at. when we take images of the sun in visible light frequencies, we see the photosphere. when we use a hydrogen-alpha telescope we see the chromosphere. the tops of the convection cells in the upper convection zone result in granulation that is visible on top of the photosphere.