in the mid-1960s, in holmdel, new jersey, arno penzias and robert wilson of at&t’s bell laboratories had built a delicate microwave antenna (figure 29.16) to measure astronomical sources, including supernova remnants like cassiopeia a (see the chapter on the death of stars). they were plagued with some unexpected background noise, just like faint static on a radio, which they could not get rid of. the puzzling thing about this radiation was that it seemed to be coming from all directions at once. this is very unusual in astronomy: after all, most radiation has a specific direction where it is strongest—the direction of the sun, or a supernova 1028 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1046_img1.jpeg] remnant, or the disk of the milky way, for example. figure 29.16 robert wilson (left) and arno penzias (right). these two scientists are standing in front of the horn-shaped antenna with which they discovered the cosmic background radiation. the photo was taken in 1978, just after they received the nobel prize in physics.
penzias and wilson at first thought that any radiation appearing to come from all directions must originate from inside their telescope, so they took everything apart to look for the source of the noise. they even found that some pigeons had roosted inside the big horn-shaped antenna and had left (as penzias delicately put it) “a layer of white, sticky, dielectric substance coating the inside of the antenna.” however, nothing the scientists did could reduce the background radiation to zero, and they reluctantly came to accept that it must be real, and it must be coming from space. penzias and wilson were not cosmologists, but as they began to discuss their puzzling discovery with other scientists, they were quickly put in touch with a group of astronomers and physicists at princeton university (a short drive away). these astronomers had—as it happened—been redoing the calculations of alpher and herman from the 1940s and also realized that the radiation from the decoupling time should be detectable as a faint afterglow of radio waves. the different calculations of what the observed temperature would be for this cosmic microwave background (cmb)2 were uncertain, but all predicted less than 40 k.
penzias and wilson found the distribution of intensity at different radio wavelengths to correspond to a temperature of 3.5 k. this is very cold—closer to absolute zero than most other astronomical measurements—and a testament to how much space (and the waves within it) has stretched. their measurements have been repeated with better instruments, which give us a reading of 2.73 k. so penzias and wilson came very close. rounding this value, scientists often refer to “the 3-degree microwave background.” many other experiments on earth and in space soon confirmed the discovery by penzias and wilson: the radiation was indeed coming from all directions (it was isotropic) and matched the predictions of the big bang theory with remarkable precision. penzias and wilson had inadvertently observed the glow from the primeval fireball. they received the nobel prize for their work in 1978. and just before his death in 1966, lemaître learned that his “vanished brilliance” had been discovered and confirmed.
you may enjoy watching three degrees, a 26-minute video (https://openstax.org/l/30threedegvid) from bell labs about penzias and wilson’s discovery of the cosmic background radiation (with interesting historical footage). link to learning 2 recall that microwaves are in the radio region of the electromagnetic spectrum. 29.4 • the cosmic microwave background 1029 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1047_img1.jpeg] properties of the cosmic microwave background one issue that worried astronomers is that penzias and wilson were measuring the background radiation filling space through earth’s atmosphere. what if that atmosphere is a source of radio waves or somehow affected their measurements? it would be better to measure something this important from space. the first accurate measurements of the cmb were made with a satellite orbiting earth. named the cosmic background explorer (cobe), it was launched by nasa in november 1989. the data it received quickly showed that the cmb closely matches that expected from a blackbody with a temperature of 2.73 k (figure 29.17). this is exactly the result expected if the cmb was indeed redshifted radiation emitted by a hot gas that filled all of space shortly after the universe began.