to establish that there really is a black hole there, we must show that there is a very large amount of mass crammed into a very tiny volume. as we saw in black holes and curved spacetime, proving that a black hole exists is a challenge because the black hole itself emits no radiation. what astronomers must do is prove that a black hole is the only possible explanation for our observations—that a small region contains far more mass than could be accounted for by a very dense cluster of stars or something else made of ordinary matter. to put some numbers with this discussion, the radius of the event horizon of a galactic black hole with a mass of about 4 million msun would be only about 17 times the size of the sun—the equivalent of a single red giant star. the corresponding density within this region of space would be much higher than that of any star cluster or any other ordinary astronomical object. therefore, we must measure both the diameter of sagittarius a* and its mass. both radio and infrared observations are required to give us the necessary evidence. first, let’s look at how the mass can be measured.
if we zero in on the inner few light-days of the galaxy with an infrared telescope equipped with adaptive optics, we see a region crowded with individual stars (figure 25.17). these stars have now been observed for almost two decades, and astronomers have detected their 25.4 • the center of the galaxy 879 [image: astronomy_openstax_page897_img1.jpeg] rapid orbital motions around the very center of the galaxy. figure 25.17 near-infrared view of the galactic center. this image shows the inner 1 arcsecond, or 0.13 light-year, at the center of the galaxy, as observed with the giant keck telescope. tracks of the orbiting stars measured from 1995 to 2014 have been added to this “snapshot.” the stars are moving around the center very fast, and their tracks are all consistent with a single massive “gravitator” that resides in the very center of this image. (credit: modification of work by andrea ghez, ucla galactic center group, w.m.
keck observatory laser team) check out an animated version (https://openstax.org/l/30anifiginfgal) of figure 25.17, showing the motion of the stars over the years. also see a more sophisticated app (https://openstax.org/l/30starmotion) for following the motion of these stars. in many browsers, you will be offered a translation of the german text. if we combine observations of their periods and the size of their orbits with kepler’s third law, we can estimate the mass of the object that keeps them in their orbits. one of the stars has been observed for its full orbit of 15.6 years. its closest approach takes it to a distance of only 124 au or about 17 light-hours from the black hole. this orbit, when combined with observations of other stars close to the galactic center, indicates that a mass of 4.6 million msun must be concentrated inside the orbit—that is, within 17 light-hours of the center of the galaxy. even tighter limits on the size of the concentration of mass at the center of the galaxy come from radio astronomy, which provided the first clue that a black hole might lie at the center of the galaxy.
as matter spirals inward toward the event horizon of a black hole, it is heated in a whirling accretion disk and produces radio radiation. (such accretion disks were explained in black holes and curved spacetime.) measurements of the size of the accretion disk with the very long baseline array, which provides very high spatial resolution, show that the diameter of the radio source sagittarius a* is no larger than about 0.3 au, or about the size of mercury’s orbit. (in light units, that’s only 2.5 light-minutes!) the observations thus show that 4.6 million solar masses are crammed into a volume that has a diameter that is no larger than the orbit of mercury. if this were anything other than a supermassive black hole—low-mass stars that emit very little light or neutron stars or a very large number of small black holes— calculations show that these objects would be so densely packed that they would collapse to a single black hole within a hundred thousand years. that is a very short time compared with the age of the galaxy, which probably began forming more than 13 billion years ago.