table 42 outlines the types of galaxies found in the local group. dwarf spherical galaxies are very faint galaxies and this classification is only used in the local group. they are members of the elliptical galaxies but are fairly spherical. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 319 figure 382: the local galaxy cluster diagram by andrew z. colvin component 147 – galaxy clusters the local group the local group of galaxies consists of the milky way galaxy and its satellite galaxies, and also the andromeda galaxy and its satellite galaxies. this is a total of 67 known galaxies. the diameter of the local group is over 3.3 million light-years. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page319_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 320 figure 383: the local galaxy supercluster diagram by andrew z. colvin the virgo supercluster our galaxy cluster is part of a larger structure, a local supercluster, called the virgo supercluster. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page320_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 321 figure 384: the local superclusters of galaxies diagram by andrew z.
colvin extended structure when you look beyond our local supercluster you find more superclusters. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page321_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 322 distant galaxies are receding from the milky way recession velocity is directly related to distance component 148 – galaxy recession and red shift most galaxies in the universe are receding from us. those that are local are not, and they exhibit the motions associated with galaxies gravitationally bound in a cluster. this was first noted by vesto slipher who was working with percival lowell. this was determined by the red shift of lines in the spectra for those galaxies. the galaxy recession speeds were charted on a graph by edwin hubble in the 1920s. what he observed was that the recessional velocity of distant galaxies is directly related to the distance to that galaxy. this is what we know as hubble’s law. these galaxies are not moving away from us through normal motion, but they are getting further away from us due to the expansion of the universe: the expansion of space itself. this will be discussed later in this book. there are many redshifts found in the universe.
there is redshift related to radial motion, there is gravitational redshift around massive objects, and this defines a third type of redshift known as cosmological redshift, due to the expansion of space. this cosmological redshift only affects things very far apart. it does not affect objects that are gravitationally bound to each other: stars in a galaxy, galaxies in a galaxy cluster, or objects on the earth. hubble’s law states that the universe is expanding. this implies that if we reverse time, and travel backwards, they were closer together in the past. if we continue to travel back in time they must have been in a single point in space and time: the big bang. this too will be discussed in later chapters. hubble’s law is what we use to measure the distance to the most distant objects. by measuring the red shift of a galaxy we are able to determine its distance.
astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 323 the milky way galaxy is 100,000 light-years across the sun is 25,000 light-years from the central black hole figure 385: the milky way from earth photo by steve jurvetson figure 386: the milky way galaxy dimensions component 149 – milky way galaxy dimensions our galaxy is the milky way galaxy. it is a large barred-spiral galaxy. as seen from dark skies, it appears as a river of spilled milk. it is thousands of stars that are too faint to see individually with the unaided eye, but that together create a glow that stretches across the sky. the river of milk is interrupted by many dark nebulae.