using this method, some associations and open clusters turn out to be as young as 1 million years old, while others are several hundred million years old. once all of the interstellar matter surrounding a cluster has been used to form stars or has dispersed and moved away from the cluster, star formation ceases, and stars of progressively lower mass move off the main sequence, as shown in figure 22.10, figure 22.12, and figure 22.13. to our surprise, even the youngest of the globular clusters in our galaxy are found to be older than the oldest open cluster. all of the globular clusters have main sequences that turn off at a luminosity less than that of the sun. star formation in these crowded systems ceased billions of years ago, and no new stars are coming on to the main sequence to replace the ones that have turned off (see figure 22.15). link to learning 756 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page774_img1.jpeg] figure 22.15 h–r diagrams for clusters of different ages.
this sketch shows how the turn-off point from the main sequence gets lower as we make h–r diagrams for clusters that are older and older. indeed, the globular clusters are the oldest structures in our galaxy (and in other galaxies as well). the youngest have ages of about 11 billion years and some appear to be even older. since these are the oldest objects we know of, this estimate is one of the best limits we have on the age of the universe itself—it must be at least 11 billion years old. we will return to the fascinating question of determining the age of the entire universe in the chapter on the big bang. 22.4 further evolution of stars learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the “life story” we have related so far applies to almost all stars: each starts as a contracting protostar, then lives most of its life as a stable main-sequence star, and eventually moves off the main sequence toward the red-giant region. as we have seen, the pace at which each star goes through these stages depends on its mass, with more massive stars evolving more quickly.
but after this point, the life stories of stars of different masses diverge, with a wider range of possible behavior according to their masses, their compositions, and the presence of any nearby companion stars. because we have written this book for students taking their first astronomy course, we will recount a simplified version of what happens to stars as they move toward the final stages in their lives. we will (perhaps to your heartfelt relief) not delve into all the possible ways aging stars can behave and the strange things that happen when a star is orbited by a second star in a binary system. instead, we will focus only on the key stages in the evolution of single stars and show how the evolution of high-mass stars differs from that of low-mass stars (such as our sun). helium fusion let’s begin by considering stars with composition like that of the sun and whose initial masses are comparatively low—no more than about twice the mass of our sun. (such mass may not seem too low, but stars with masses less than this all behave in a fairly similar fashion.
we will see what happens to more massive stars in the next section.) because there are many more low-mass stars than high-mass stars in the milky way, the vast majority of stars—including our sun—follow the scenario we are about to relate. by the way, we carefully used the term initial masses of stars because, as we will see, stars can lose quite a bit of mass explain what happens in a star’s core when all of the hydrogen has been used up define “planetary nebulae” and discuss their origin discuss the creation of new chemical elements during the late stages of stellar evolution 22.4 • further evolution of stars 757 [image: astronomy_openstax_page775_img1.jpeg] in the process of aging and dying. remember that red giants start out with a helium core where no energy generation is taking place, surrounded by a shell where hydrogen is undergoing fusion. the core, having no source of energy to oppose the inward pull of gravity, is shrinking and growing hotter. as time goes on, the temperature in the core can rise to much hotter values than it had in its main-sequence days.