figure 9.8 lunar mountain. this photo of mt. hadley on the edge of mare imbrium was taken by dave scott, one of the apollo 15 astronauts. note the smooth contours of the lunar mountains, which have not been sculpted by water or ice. (credit: nasa/apollo lunar surface journal) the maria are much less cratered than the highlands, and cover just 17% of the lunar surface, mostly on the side of the moon that faces earth (figure 9.9). 9.2 • the lunar surface 297 [image: astronomy_openstax_page315_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page315_img2.jpeg] figure 9.9 lunar maria. about 17% of the moon’s surface consists of the maria—flat plains of basaltic lava. this view of mare imbrium also shows numerous secondary craters and evidence of material ejected from the large crater copernicus on the upper horizon. copernicus is an impact crater almost 100 kilometers in diameter that was formed long after the lava in imbrium had already been deposited.
(credit: nasa, apollo 17) today, we know that the maria consist mostly of dark-colored basalt (volcanic lava) laid down in volcanic eruptions billions of years ago. eventually, these lava flows partly filled the huge depressions called impact basins, which had been produced by collisions of large chunks of material with the moon relatively early in its history. the basalt on the moon (figure 9.10) is very similar in composition to the crust under the oceans of earth or to the lavas erupted by many terrestrial volcanoes. the youngest of the lunar impact basins is mare orientale, shown in figure 9.11. figure 9.10 rock from a lunar mare. in this sample of basalt from the mare surface, you can see the holes left by gas bubbles, which are characteristic of rock formed from lava. all lunar rocks are chemically distinct from terrestrial rocks, a fact that has allowed scientists to identify a few lunar samples among the thousands of meteorites that reach earth.
(credit: modification of work by nasa) 298 9 • cratered worlds access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page316_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page316_img2.jpeg] figure 9.11 mare orientale. the youngest of the large lunar impact basins is orientale, formed 3.8 billion years ago. its outer ring is about 1000 kilometers in diameter, roughly the distance between new york city and detroit, michigan. unlike most of the other basins, orientale has not been completely filled in with lava flows, so it retains its striking “bull’s-eye” appearance. it is located on the edge of the moon as seen from earth. (credit: nasa) volcanic activity may have begun very early in the moon’s history, although most evidence of the first half billion years is lost. what we do know is that the major mare volcanism, which involved the release of lava from hundreds of kilometers below the surface, ended about 3.3 billion years ago. after that, the moon’s interior cooled, and volcanic activity was limited to a very few small areas.
the primary forces altering the surface come from the outside, not the interior. on the lunar surface “the surface is fine and powdery. i can pick it up loosely with my toe. but i can see the footprints of my boots and the treads in the fine sandy particles.” —neil armstrong, apollo 11 astronaut, immediately after stepping onto the moon for the first time. the surface of the moon is buried under a fine-grained soil of tiny, shattered rock fragments. the dark basaltic dust of the lunar maria was kicked up by every astronaut footstep, and thus eventually worked its way into all of the astronauts’ equipment. the upper layers of the surface are porous, consisting of loosely packed dust into which their boots sank several centimeters (figure 9.12). this lunar dust, like so much else on the moon, is the product of impacts. each cratering event, large or small, breaks up the rock of the lunar surface and scatters the fragments. ultimately, billions of years of impacts have reduced much of the surface layer to particles about the size of dust or sand.