once it reaches a temperature of 100 million k (but not before such point), three helium atoms can begin to fuse to form a single carbon nucleus. this process is called the triple-alpha process, so named because physicists call the nucleus of the helium atom an alpha particle. when the triple-alpha process begins in low-mass (about 0.8 to 2.0 solar masses) stars, calculations show that the entire core is ignited in a quick burst of fusion called a helium flash. (more massive stars also ignite helium but more gradually and not with a flash.) as soon as the temperature at the center of the star becomes high enough to start the triple-alpha process, the extra energy released is transmitted quickly through the entire helium core, producing very rapid heating. the heating speeds up the nuclear reactions, which provide more heating, and which accelerates the nuclear reactions even more. we have runaway generation of energy, which reignites the entire helium core in a flash. you might wonder why the next major step in nuclear fusion in stars involves three helium nuclei and not just two. although it is a lot easier to get two helium nuclei to collide, the product of this collision is not stable and falls apart very quickly.
it takes three helium nuclei coming together simultaneously to make a stable nuclear structure. given that each helium nucleus has two positive protons and that such protons repel one another, you can begin to see the problem. it takes a temperature of 100 million k to slam three helium nuclei (six protons) together and make them stick. but when that happens, the star produces a carbon nucleus. stars in your little finger stop reading for a moment and look at your little finger. it’s full of carbon atoms because carbon is a fundamental chemical building block for life on earth. each of those carbon atoms was once inside a red giant star and was fused from helium nuclei in the triple-alpha process. all the carbon on earth—in you, in the charcoal you use for barbecuing, and in the diamonds you might exchange with a loved one—was “cooked up” by previous generations of stars. how the carbon atoms (and other elements) made their way from inside some of those stars to become part of earth is something we will discuss in the next chapter. for now, we want to emphasize that our description of stellar evolution is, in a very real sense, the story of our own cosmic “roots”—the history of how our own atoms originated among the stars.
we are made of “star-stuff.” becoming a giant again after the helium flash, the star, having survived the “energy crisis” that followed the end of the main-sequence stage and the exhaustion of the hydrogen fuel at its center, finds its balance again. as the star readjusts to the release of energy from the triple-alpha process in its core, its internal structure changes once more: its surface temperature increases and its overall luminosity decreases. the point that represents the star on the h–r diagram thus moves to a new position to the left of and somewhat below its place as a red giant (figure 22.16). the star then continues to fuse the helium in its core for a while, returning to the kind of equilibrium between pressure and gravity that characterized the main-sequence stage. during this time, a newly formed carbon nucleus at the center of the star can sometimes be joined by another helium nucleus to produce a nucleus of oxygen—another building block of life. astronomy basics 758 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org figure 22.16 evolution of a star like the sun on an h–r diagram. each stage in the star’s life is labeled.
(a) the star evolves from the main sequence to be a red giant, decreasing in surface temperature and increasing in luminosity. (b) a helium flash occurs, leading to a readjustment of the star’s internal structure and to (c) a brief period of stability during which helium is fused to carbon and oxygen in the core (in the process the star becomes hotter and less luminous than it was as a red giant). (d) after the central helium is exhausted, the star becomes a giant again and moves to higher luminosity and lower temperature. by this time, however, the star has exhausted its inner resources and will soon begin to die. where the evolutionary track becomes a dashed line, the changes are so rapid that they are difficult to model. however, at a temperature of 100 million k, the inner core is converting its helium fuel to carbon (and a bit of oxygen) at a rapid rate. thus, the new period of stability cannot last very long: it is far shorter than the main- sequence stage. soon, all the helium hot enough for fusion will be used up, just like the hot hydrogen that was used up earlier in the star’s evolution. once again, the inner core will not be able to generate energy via fusion.