for example, the brightest star in the sky, sirius, sends us about 10 times as much light as the average first-magnitude star. on the modern magnitude scale, sirius, the star with the brightest apparent magnitude, has been assigned a magnitude of −1.5. other objects in the sky can appear even brighter. venus at its brightest is of magnitude −4.4, while the sun has a magnitude of −26.8. figure 17.2 shows the range of observed magnitudes from the brightest to the faintest, along with the actual magnitudes of several well-known objects. the important fact to remember when using magnitude is that the system goes backward: the larger the magnitude, the fainter the object you are observing. figure 17.2 apparent magnitudes of well-known objects. the faintest magnitudes that can be detected by the unaided eye, binoculars, and large telescopes are also shown. 17.1 • the brightness of stars 575 [image: astronomy_openstax_page593_img1.jpeg] e x a m p l e 1 7.
1 the magnitude equation even scientists can’t calculate fifth roots in their heads, so astronomers have summarized the above discussion in an equation to help calculate the difference in brightness for stars with different magnitudes. if m1 and m2 are the magnitudes of two stars, then we can calculate the ratio of their brightness using this equation: here is another way to write this equation: let’s do a real example, just to show how this works. imagine that an astronomer has discovered something special about a dim star (magnitude 8.5), and she wants to tell her students how much dimmer the star is than sirius. star 1 in the equation will be our dim star and star 2 will be sirius. solution remember, sirius has a magnitude of . in that case: check your learning it is a common misconception that polaris (magnitude 2.0) is the brightest star in the sky, but, as we saw, that distinction actually belongs to sirius (magnitude −1.5). how does sirius’ apparent brightness compare to that of polaris? answer: (hint: if you only have a basic calculator, you may wonder how to take 100 to the 0.7th power.
but this is something you can ask google to do. google now accepts mathematical questions and will answer them. so try it for yourself. ask google, “what is 100 to the 0.7th power?”) our calculation shows that sirius’ apparent brightness is 25 times greater than polaris’ apparent brightness. other units of brightness although the magnitude scale is still used for visual astronomy, it is not used at all in newer branches of the field. in radio astronomy, for example, no equivalent of the magnitude system has been defined. rather, radio astronomers measure the amount of energy being collected each second by each square meter of a radio telescope and express the brightness of each source in terms of, for example, watts per square meter. similarly, most researchers in the fields of infrared, x-ray, and gamma-ray astronomy use energy per area per second rather than magnitudes to express the results of their measurements. nevertheless, astronomers in all fields are careful to distinguish between the luminosity of the source (even when that luminosity is all in x-rays) 576 17 • analyzing starlight access for free at openstax.org and the amount of energy that happens to reach us on earth.
after all, the luminosity is a really important characteristic that tells us a lot about the object in question, whereas the energy that reaches earth is an accident of cosmic geography. to make the comparison among stars easy, in this text, we avoid the use of magnitudes as much as possible and will express the luminosity of other stars in terms of the sun’s luminosity. for example, the luminosity of sirius is 25 times that of the sun. we use the symbol lsun to denote the sun’s luminosity; hence, that of sirius can be written as 25 lsun. 17.2 colors of stars learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: look at the beautiful picture of the stars in the sagittarius star cloud shown in figure 17.3. the stars show a multitude of colors, including red, orange, yellow, white, and blue. as we have seen, stars are not all the same color because they do not all have identical temperatures. to define color precisely, astronomers have devised quantitative methods for characterizing the color of a star and then using those colors to determine stellar temperatures.