can you see why astronomers were so surprised and puzzled when they first determined the orbit of the companion to sirius? 45. how much would you weigh if you were suddenly transported to the white dwarf sirius b? you may use your own weight (or if don’t want to own up to what it is, assume you weigh 70 kg or 150 lb). in this case, assume that the companion to sirius has a mass equal to that of the sun and a radius equal to that of earth. remember newton’s law of gravity: and that your weight is proportional to the force that you feel. what kind of star should you travel to if you want to lose weight (and not gain it)? 46. the star betelgeuse has a temperature of 3400 k and a luminosity of 13,200 lsun. calculate the radius of betelgeuse relative to the sun. 47. using the information provided in table 18.1, what is the average stellar density in our part of the galaxy? use only the true stars (types o–m) and assume a spherical distribution with radius of 26 light-years. 48.
confirm that the angular diameter of the sun of 1/2° corresponds to a linear diameter of 1.39 million km. use the average distance of the sun and earth to derive the answer. (hint: this can be solved using a trigonometric function.) 49. an eclipsing binary star system is observed with the following contact times for the main eclipse: table c contact time date first contact 12:00 p.m. march 12 second contact 4:00 p.m. march 13 third contact 9:00 a.m. march 18 fourth contact 1:00 p.m. march 19 the orbital velocity of the smaller star relative to the larger is 62,000 km/h. determine the diameters for each star in the system. 634 18 • exercises access for free at openstax.org 50. if a 100 solar mass star were to have a luminosity of 107 times the sun’s luminosity, how would such a star’s density compare when it is on the main sequence as an o-type star, and when it is a cool supergiant (m-type)?
use values of temperature from figure 18.14 or figure 18.15 and the relationship between luminosity, radius, and temperature as given in exercise 18.47. 51. if betelgeuse had a mass that was 25 times that of the sun, how would its average density compare to that of the sun? use the definition of , where the volume is that of a sphere. 18 • exercises 635 636 18 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 19.1 globular cluster m80. this beautiful image shows a giant cluster of stars called messier 80, located about 28,000 light- years from earth. such crowded groups, which astronomers call globular clusters, contain hundreds of thousands of stars, including some of the rr lyrae variables discussed in this chapter. especially obvious in this picture are the bright red giants, which are stars similar to the sun in mass that are nearing the ends of their lives.
(credit: modification of work by the hubble heritage team (aura/ stsci/ nasa)) chapter outline 19.1 fundamental units of distance 19.2 surveying the stars 19.3 variable stars: one key to cosmic distances 19.4 the h–r diagram and cosmic distances thinking ahead how large is the universe? what is the most distant object we can see? these are among the most fundamental questions astronomers can ask. but just as babies must crawl before they can take their first halting steps, so too must we start with a more modest question: how far away are the stars? and even this question proves to be very hard to answer. after all, stars are mere points of light. suppose you see a point of light in the darkness when you are driving on a country road late at night. how can you tell whether it is a nearby firefly, an oncoming motorcycle some distance away, or the porchlight of a house much farther down the road? it’s not so easy, is it? astronomers faced an even more difficult problem when they tried to estimate how far away the stars are. in this chapter, we begin with the fundamental definitions of distances on earth and then extend our reach outward to the stars.