with this device, wollaston saw that the colors were not spread out uniformly, but instead, some ranges of color were missing, appearing as dark bands in the solar spectrum. he mistakenly attributed these lines to natural boundaries between the colors. in 1815, german physicist joseph fraunhofer, upon a more careful examination of the solar spectrum, found about 600 such dark lines (missing colors), which led scientists to rule out the boundary hypothesis (figure 5.11). figure 5.11 visible spectrum of the sun. our star’s spectrum is crossed by dark lines produced by atoms in the solar atmosphere that absorb light at certain wavelengths. (credit: modification of work by nigel sharp, noao/national solar observatory at kitt peak/ aura, and the national science foundation) later, researchers found that similar dark lines could be produced in the spectra (“spectra” is the plural of “spectrum”) of artificial light sources. they did this by passing their light through various apparently transparent substances—usually containers with just a bit of thin gas in them.
5.3 • spectroscopy in astronomy 157 [image: astronomy_openstax_page175_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page175_img2.jpeg] these gases turned out not to be transparent at all colors: they were quite opaque at a few sharply defined wavelengths. something in each gas had to be absorbing just a few colors of light and no others. all gases did this, but each different element absorbed a different set of colors and thus showed different dark lines. if the gas in a container consisted of two elements, then light passing through it was missing the colors (showing dark lines) for both of the elements. so it became clear that certain lines in the spectrum “go with” certain elements. this discovery was one of the most important steps forward in the history of astronomy. what would happen if there were no continuous spectrum for our gases to remove light from? what if, instead, we heated the same thin gases until they were hot enough to glow with their own light? when the gases were heated, a spectrometer revealed no continuous spectrum, but several separate bright lines. that is, these hot gases emitted light only at certain specific wavelengths or colors.
when the gas was pure hydrogen, it would emit one pattern of colors; when it was pure sodium, it would emit a different pattern. a mixture of hydrogen and sodium emitted both sets of spectral lines. the colors the gases emitted when they were heated were the very same colors as those they had absorbed when a continuous source of light was behind them. from such experiments, scientists began to see that different substances showed distinctive spectral signatures by which their presence could be detected (figure 5.12). just as your signature allows the bank to identify you, the unique pattern of colors for each type of atom (its spectrum) can help us identify which element or elements are in a gas. figure 5.12 continuous spectrum and line spectra from different elements. each type of glowing gas (each element) produces its own unique pattern of lines, so the composition of a gas can be identified by its spectrum. the spectra of sodium, hydrogen, calcium, and mercury gases are shown here. types of spectra in these experiments, then, there were three different types of spectra. a continuous spectrum (formed when a solid or very dense gas gives off radiation) is an array of all wavelengths or colors of the rainbow.
a continuous spectrum can serve as a backdrop from which the atoms of much less dense gas can absorb light. a dark line, or absorption spectrum, consists of a series or pattern of dark lines—missing colors—superimposed upon the continuous spectrum of a source. a bright line, or emission spectrum, appears as a pattern or series of bright lines; it consists of light in which only certain discrete wavelengths are present. (figure 5.11 shows an absorption spectrum, whereas figure 5.12 shows the emission spectrum of a number of common elements along with an example of a continuous spectrum.) 158 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page176_img1.jpeg] when we have a hot, thin gas, each particular chemical element or compound produces its own characteristic pattern of spectral lines—its spectral signature. no two types of atoms or molecules give the same patterns. in other words, each particular gas can absorb or emit only certain wavelengths of the light peculiar to that gas. in contrast, absorption spectra occur when passing white light through a cool, thin gas.