according to general relativity (which will be discussed in black holes and curved spacetime), the orbits of a binary star system composed of such objects should slowly decay with time, eventually (after millions or billions of years) causing the two objects to slam together in a violent but brief explosion. because the decay of the binary orbit is so slow, we would expect more of these mergers to occur in old galaxies in which star formation has long since stopped. to learn more about the merger of two neutron stars and how they can produce a burst that lasts less than a second, check out this computer simulation (https://openstax.org/l/30comsimneustr) by nasa. while it was impossible to be sure of this model based on only a single event (it is possible this burst actually came from a background galaxy and lined up with the giant elliptical only by chance), several dozen more short-duration gamma-ray bursts have since been located by swift, many of which also originate from galaxies with very low star-formation rates. this has given astronomers greater confidence that this model is the correct one.
still, to be fully convinced, astronomers started searching for a “smoking gun” signature for the link to learning 23.6 • the mystery of the gamma-ray bursts 813 [image: astronomy_openstax_page831_img1.jpeg] merger of two ultra-dense stellar remnants. astronomers identified two observations that would provide more direct evidence. theoretical calculations indicate that when two neutron stars collide there will be a very special kind of explosion; neutrons stripped from the neutron stars during the violent final phase of the merger will fuse together into heavy elements and then release heat due to radioactivity, producing a short-lived but red supernova sometimes called a kilonova. (the term is used because it is about a thousand times brighter than an ordinary nova, but not quite as “super” as a traditional supernova.) hubble observations of one short-duration gamma-ray burst in 2013 showed suggestive evidence of such a signature, but needed to be confirmed by future observations. the second “smoking gun” is the detection of gravitational waves.
as will be discussed in black holes and curved spacetime, gravitational waves are ripples in the fabric of spacetime that general relativity predicts should be produced by the acceleration of extremely massive and dense objects—such as two neutron stars or black holes spiraling toward each other and colliding. the construction of instruments to detect gravitational waves is very challenging technically, and gravitational wave astronomy became feasible only in 2015. the first few detected gravitational wave events were produced by mergers of black holes. in 2017, however, gravitational waves were observed from a source that was coincident in time and space with a gamma-ray burst. the source consisted of two objects with the masses of neutron stars. a red supernova was also observed at this location, and the ejected material was rich in heavy elements. this observation not only confirms the theory of the origin of short gamma-ray bursts, but also is a spectacular demonstration of the validity of einstein’s general theory of relativity. probing the universe with gamma-ray bursts the story of how astronomers came to explain the origin of the different kinds of bursts is a good example of how the scientific process sometimes resembles good detective work.
while the mystery of short-duration gamma-ray bursts is still being unraveled, the focus of studies for long-duration gamma-ray bursts has begun to change from understanding the origin of the bursts themselves (which is now fairly well-established) to using them as tools to understand the broader universe. the reason that long-duration gamma-ray bursts are useful has to do with their extreme luminosities, if only for a short time. in fact, long-duration gamma-ray bursts are so bright that they could easily be seen at distances that correspond to a few hundred million years after the expansion of the universe began, which is when theorists think that the first generation of stars formed. some theories predict that the first stars are likely to be massive and complete their evolution in only a million years or so. if this turns out to be the case, then gamma-ray bursts (which signal the death of some of these stars) may provide us with the best way of probing the universe when stars and galaxies first began to form. so far, the most distant gamma-ray burst found (on april 29, 2009) was in a galaxy with a redshift that corresponds to a remarkable 13.2 billion light years—meaning it happened only 600 million years after the big bang itself.
this is comparable to the earliest and most distant galaxies found by the hubble space telescope. it is not quite old enough to expect that it formed from the first generation of stars, but its appearance at this distance still gives us useful information about the production of stars in the early universe. astronomers continue to scan the skies, looking for even more distant events signaling the deaths of stars from even further back in time.