each cell has a slightly different temperature from its neighbor, and each cell acts like a lens, bending (refracting) the path of the light by a small amount. this bending slightly changes the position where each light ray finally reaches the detector in a telescope. the cells of air are in motion, constantly being blown through the light path of the telescope by winds, often in different directions at different altitudes. as a result, the path followed by the light is constantly changing. for an analogy, think about watching a parade from a window high up in a skyscraper. you decide to throw some confetti down toward the marchers. even if you drop a handful all at the same time and in the same direction, air currents will toss the pieces around, and they will reach the ground at different places. as we described earlier, we can think of the light from the stars as a series of parallel beams, each making its way through the atmosphere. each path will be slightly different, and each will reach the detector of the telescope at a slightly different place. the result is a blurred image, and because the cells are being blown by the wind, the nature of the blur will change many times each second.
you have probably noticed this effect as the “twinkling” of stars seen from earth. the light beams are bent enough that part of the time they reach your eye, and part of the time some of them miss, thereby making the star seem to vary in brightness. in space, however, the light of the stars is steady. astronomers search the world for locations where the amount of atmospheric blurring, or turbulence, is as small as possible. it turns out that the best sites are in coastal mountain ranges and on isolated volcanic peaks in the middle of an ocean. air that has flowed long distances over water before it encounters land is especially stable. the resolution of an image is measured in units of angle on the sky, typically in units of arcseconds. one arcsecond is 1/3600 degree, and there are 360 degrees in a full circle. so we are talking about tiny angles on 196 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page214_img1.jpeg] the sky. to give you a sense of just how tiny, we might note that 1 arcsecond is how big a quarter would look when seen from a distance of 5 kilometers.
the best images obtained from the ground with traditional techniques reveal details as small as several tenths of an arcsecond across. this image size is remarkably good. one of the main reasons for launching the hubble space telescope was to escape earth’s atmosphere and obtain even sharper images. but since we can’t put every telescope into space, astronomers have devised a technique called adaptive optics that can beat earth’s atmosphere at its own game of blurring. this technique (which is most effective in the infrared region of the spectrum with our current technology) makes use of a small flexible mirror placed in the beam of a telescope. a sensor measures how much the atmosphere has distorted the image, and as often as 500 times per second, it sends instructions to the flexible mirror on how to change shape in order to compensate for distortions produced by the atmosphere. the light is thus brought back to an almost perfectly sharp focus at the detector. figure 6.13 shows just how effective this technique is. with adaptive optics, ground-based telescopes can achieve resolutions of 0.1 arcsecond or a little better in the infrared region of the spectrum. this impressive figure is the equivalent of the resolution that the hubble space telescope achieves in the visible-light region of the spectrum.
figure 6.13 power of adaptive optics. one of the clearest pictures of jupiter ever taken from the ground, this image was produced with adaptive optics using an 8-meter-diameter telescope at the very large telescope in chile. adaptive optics uses infrared wavelengths to remove atmospheric blurring, resulting in a much clearer image. (credit: modification of work by eso, f.marchis, m.wong (uc berkeley); e.marchetti, p.amico, s.tordo (eso)) how astronomers really use telescopes in the popular view (and some bad movies), an astronomer spends most nights in a cold observatory peering through a telescope, but this is not very accurate today. most astronomers do not live at observatories, but near the universities or laboratories where they work. an astronomer might spend only a week or so each year observing at the telescope and the rest of the time measuring or analyzing the data acquired from large project collaborations and dedicated surveys. many astronomers use radio telescopes for space experiments, which work just as well during the daylight hours. still others work at purely theoretical problems using supercomputers and never observe at a telescope of any kind.