assuming that a sample of rock (say, in an asteroid) solidified right after the solar system formed, approximately what fraction of the radioactive element should be left in the rock today? 7 • exercises 253 254 7 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 8.1 active geology. this image, taken from the international space station in 2006, shows a plume of ash coming from the cleveland volcano in the aleutian islands. although the plume was only visible for around two hours, such events are a testament to the dynamic nature of earth’s crust. (credit: modification of work by nasa) chapter outline 8.1 the global perspective 8.2 earth’s crust 8.3 earth’s atmosphere 8.4 life, chemical evolution, and climate change 8.5 cosmic influences on the evolution of earth thinking ahead airless worlds in our solar system seem peppered with craters large and small. earth, on the other hand, has few craters, but a thick atmosphere and much surface activity. although impacts occurred on earth at the same rate, craters have since been erased by forces in the planet’s crust and atmosphere.
what can the comparison between the obvious persistent cratering on so many other worlds, and the different appearance of earth, tell us about the history of our planet? as our first step in exploring the solar system in more detail, we turn to the most familiar planet, our own earth. the first humans to see earth as a blue sphere floating in the blackness of space were the astronauts who made the first voyage around the moon in 1968. for many people, the historic images showing our world as a small, distant globe represent a pivotal moment in human history, when it became difficult for educated human beings to view our world without a global perspective. in this chapter, we examine the composition and structure of our planet with its envelope of ocean and atmosphere. we ask how our terrestrial environment came to be the way it is today, and how it compares with other planets. earth as a planet 8 [image: astronomy_openstax_page273_img1.jpeg] 8.1 the global perspective learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: earth is a medium-size planet with a diameter of approximately 12,760 kilometers (figure 8.2).
as one of the inner or terrestrial planets, it is composed primarily of heavy elements such as iron, silicon, and oxygen—very different from the composition of the sun and stars, which are dominated by the light elements hydrogen and helium. earth’s orbit is nearly circular, and earth is warm enough to support liquid water on its surface. it is the only planet in our solar system that is neither too hot nor too cold, but “just right” for the development of life as we know it. some of the basic properties of earth are summarized in table 8.1. figure 8.2 blue marble. this image of earth from space, taken by the apollo 17 astronauts, is known as the “blue marble.” this is one of the rare images of a full earth taken during the apollo program; most images show only part of earth’s disk in sunlight.
(credit: modification of work by nasa) some properties of earth property measurement semimajor axis 1.00 au period 1.00 year mass diameter 12,756 km radius 6378 km escape velocity 11.2 km/s table 8.1 describe the components of earth’s interior and explain how scientists determined its structure specify the origin, size, and extent of earth’s magnetic field 256 8 • earth as a planet access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page274_img1.jpeg] property measurement rotational period 23 h 56 m 4 s surface area density 5.514 g/cm3 atmospheric pressure 1.00 bar table 8.1 earth’s interior the interior of a planet—even our own earth—is difficult to study, and its composition and structure must be determined indirectly. our only direct experience is with the outermost skin of earth’s crust, a layer no more than a few kilometers deep. it is important to remember that, in many ways, we know less about our own planet 5 kilometers beneath our feet than we do about the surfaces of venus and mars. earth is composed largely of metal and silicate rock (see the composition and structure of planets section).