what is the defining difference between a brown dwarf and a true star? thought questions 13. if the star sirius emits 23 times more energy than the sun, why does the sun appear brighter in the sky? 14. how would two stars of equal luminosity—one blue and the other red—appear in an image taken through a filter that passes mainly blue light? how would their appearance change in an image taken through a filter that transmits mainly red light? 15. table 17.2 lists the temperature ranges that correspond to the different spectral types. what part of the star do these temperatures refer to? why? 16. suppose you are given the task of measuring the colors of the brightest stars, listed in appendix j, through three filters: the first transmits blue light, the second transmits yellow light, and the third transmits red light. if you observe the star vega, it will appear equally bright through each of the three filters. which stars will appear brighter through the blue filter than through the red filter? which stars will appear brighter through the red filter? which star is likely to have colors most nearly like those of vega? 17.
star x has lines of ionized helium in its spectrum, and star y has bands of titanium oxide. which is hotter? why? the spectrum of star z shows lines of ionized helium and also molecular bands of titanium oxide. what is strange about this spectrum? can you suggest an explanation? 598 17 • exercises access for free at openstax.org 18. the spectrum of the sun has hundreds of strong lines of nonionized iron but only a few, very weak lines of helium. a star of spectral type b has very strong lines of helium but very weak iron lines. do these differences mean that the sun contains more iron and less helium than the b star? explain. 19. what are the approximate spectral classes of stars with the following characteristics? a. balmer lines of hydrogen are very strong; some lines of ionized metals are present. b. the strongest lines are those of ionized helium. c. lines of ionized calcium are the strongest in the spectrum; hydrogen lines show only moderate strength; lines of neutral and metals are present. d. the strongest lines are those of neutral metals and bands of titanium oxide. 20. look at the chemical elements in appendix k.
can you identify any relationship between the abundance of an element and its atomic weight? are there any obvious exceptions to this relationship? 21. appendix i lists some of the nearest stars. are most of these stars hotter or cooler than the sun? do any of them emit more energy than the sun? if so, which ones? 22. appendix j lists the stars that appear brightest in our sky. are most of these hotter or cooler than the sun? can you suggest a reason for the difference between this answer and the answer to the previous question? (hint: look at the luminosities.) is there any tendency for a correlation between temperature and luminosity? are there exceptions to the correlation? 23. what star appears the brightest in the sky (other than the sun)? the second brightest? what color is betelgeuse? use appendix j to find the answers. 24. suppose hominids one million years ago had left behind maps of the night sky. would these maps represent accurately the sky that we see today? why or why not? 25. why can only a lower limit to the rate of stellar rotation be determined from line broadening rather than the actual rotation rate? (refer to figure 17.14.) 26.
why do you think astronomers have suggested three different spectral types (l, t, and y) for the brown dwarfs instead of m? why was one not enough? 27. sam, a college student, just bought a new car. sam’s friend adam, a graduate student in astronomy, asks sam for a ride. in the car, adam remarks that the colors on the temperature control are wrong. why did he say that? figure 17.17 (credit: modification of work by michael sheehan) 28. would a red star have a smaller or larger magnitude in a red filter than in a blue filter? 29. two stars have proper motions of one arcsecond per year. star a is 20 light-years from earth, and star b is 17 • exercises 599 [image: astronomy_openstax_page617_img1.jpeg] 10 light-years away from earth. which one has the faster velocity in space? 30. suppose there are three stars in space, each moving at 100 km/s.