to get to [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page263_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page263_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 264 figure 306: a protostar the protostar for a sun- like star is 100 times bigger, and 1000 times brighter than the star the next stage in the star’s life takes approximately two million years. the density of matter in these dust clouds is quite low. there may be as little as 1*105 particles per cubic centimeter (cc). it appears that star formation involves the creation of hundreds to thousands of stars from a single dust cloud. initial fragments are then broken up into smaller fragments as the process continues. each star is formed from one of the small fragments. these are also known as bok globules. stage 3: fragment condensation once the dust cloud has broken up into fragments, the individual fragments continue to collapse due to gravity. the material is now about 1000 times denser than it was in the original dust cloud.
initially, the material is able to radiate energy from the collapse out into space, but as the density increases it will reach a point where it is difficult for the energy to escape. at this point the temperature of the fragment will increase. by the end of this stage, the fragment has condensed to the size of our solar system. the temperature continues to rise as does the density in the core of the fragment. its density is now a billion times more than the original dust cloud. at the end of this stage, the material has condensed to the point where it is forming into a ball; a protostar. stage 4: protostar a protostar of a sun-like star is still approximately 100 times the diameter of the sun, and it is 1000 times more luminous. this is also the stage where its rotation would become obvious. as the matter collapses due to gravity, it will begin to rotate with the sum of the motions of all of the particles in the original cloud. as it shrinks, the rotation speed will increase due the law of conservation of angular momentum. although the central star is beginning to form, there is still a disk of material surrounding the protostar that is 100 au in diameter.
an image of a protostar was taken by nasa in infrared using the spitzer space telescope. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page264_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 265 figure 307: t-tauri protostar the sun is about 5 billion years old the sun will be on the main sequence for about 10 billion years we can now show where a sun-like protostar would appear on the hr diagram. the protostar stage is represented by the yellow line in figure 308. although an hr diagram does not show the progress of a star throughout its life, we can use it to show where the different stages in a star’s life would be on the diagram. the protostar stage is also where strong stellar winds begin to form. initially they would be blowing outward from the poles of the axis of rotation. but over time, as the collapse continues, the protostellar winds would radiate outward in all directions. the latter part of a protostar’s evolution, where the protostellar winds are being emitted, is called the t-tauri phase.
an image taken by nasa showing the stellar winds of a t-tauri protostar is in figure 307. it is clear in the image that the strong winds are blowing the dust and gas of the cloud outward and away from the protostar. stage 5: star once the material has collapsed enough, there will be high enough pressure and temperature in the core for hydrogen fusion to begin. this is the point where the collapsing dust cloud becomes a star. the star has not reached equilibrium at this point. this stage is represented by the orange line in figure 308. stage 6: main sequence at the end of the stage as a star, our dust cloud has evolved to the point where it is stable and has reached hydrostatic equilibrium. this is the point where it becomes a main sequence star. this is the stage in which our sun is currently. for a sun-like star this stage is approximately 10 billion years long. this is the stage where the star is powered by hydrogen fusion and is making helium. this helium sits in the center of the core and accumulates throughout this stage. this is represented by the left end of the orange line in figure 308. the sun has been in this stage for about 5 billion years.