colosimo) this result, along with a variety of other experiments, leads us to conclude that the types of matter we are familiar with can make up only a tiny portion of the dark matter. another possibility is that dark matter is composed of some new type of particle—one that researchers are now trying to detect in laboratories here on earth (see the big bang). the kinds of dark matter particles that astronomers and physicists have proposed generally fall into two main categories: hot and cold dark matter. the terms hot and cold don’t refer to true temperatures, but rather to the average velocities of the particles, analogous to how we might think of particles of air moving in your room right now. in a cold room, the air particles move more slowly on average than in a warm room. in the early universe, if dark matter particles easily moved fast and far compared to the lumps and bumps of ordinary matter that eventually became galaxies and larger structures, we call those particles hot dark matter. in that case, smaller lumps and bumps would be smeared out by the particle motions, meaning fewer small galaxies would get made.
on the other hand, if the dark matter particles moved slowly and covered only small distances compared to the sizes of the lumps in the early universe, we call that cold dark matter. their slow speeds and energy would mean that even the smaller lumps of ordinary matter would survive to grow into small galaxies. by looking at when galaxies formed and how they evolve, we can use observations to distinguish between the two kinds of dark matter. so far, observations seem most consistent with models based on cold dark matter. solving the dark matter problem is one of the biggest challenges facing astronomers. after all, we can hardly understand the evolution of galaxies and the long-term history of the universe without understanding what its most massive component is made of. for example, we need to know just what role dark matter played in starting the higher-density “seeds” that led to the formation of galaxies. and since many galaxies have large halos made of dark matter, how does this affect their interactions with one another and the shapes and types of galaxies that their collisions create? astronomers armed with various theories are working hard to produce models of galaxy structure and evolution that take dark matter into account in just the right way.
even though we don’t know what the dark matter is, we do have some clues about how it affected the formation of the very first galaxies. as we will see in the big bang, careful measurements of the microwave radiation left over after the big bang have allowed astronomers to set very tight limits on the actual sizes of those early seeds that led to the formation of the large galaxies that we see in today’s universe. astronomers have also measured the relative numbers and distances between galaxies and clusters of different sizes in the universe today. so far, most of the evidence seems to weigh heavily in favor of cold dark matter, and most current models of galaxy and large-scale structure formation use cold dark matter as their main ingredient. as if the presence of dark matter—a mysterious substance that exerts gravity and outweighs all the known stars and galaxies in the universe but does not emit or absorb light—were not enough, there is an even more baffling and equally important constituent of the universe that has only recently been discovered: we have called it dark energy in parallel with dark matter. we will say more about it and explore its effects on the evolution of the universe in the big bang.
for now, we can complete our inventory of the contents of the universe by noting that it appears that the entire universe contains some mysterious energy that pushes spacetime apart, taking galaxies and the larger structures made of galaxies along with it. observations show that dark energy becomes more and more important relative to gravity as the universe ages. as a result, the expansion of the universe is accelerating, and this acceleration seems to be happening mostly since the universe was about half its current age. what we see when we peer out into the universe—the light from trillions of stars in hundreds of billions of galaxies wrapped in intricate veils of gas and dust—is therefore actually only a sprinkling of icing on top of the 28.4 • the challenge of dark matter 989 cake: as we will see in the big bang, when we look outside galaxies and clusters of galaxies at the universe as a whole, astronomers find that for every gram of luminous normal matter, such as protons, neutrons, electrons, and atoms in the universe, there are about 4 grams of nonluminous normal matter, mainly intergalactic hydrogen and helium.