specify what fraction of the density of the universe is contributed by stars and galaxies and how much ordinary matter (such as hydrogen, helium, and other elements we are familiar with here on earth) makes up the overall density describe how ideas about the contents of the universe have changed over the last 50 years explain why it is so difficult to determine what dark matter really is explain why dark matter helped galaxies form quickly in the early universe summarize the evolution of the universe from the time the cmb was emitted to the present day 1034 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org figure 29.21 composition of the universe. only about 5% of all the mass and energy in the universe is matter with which we are familiar here on earth. most ordinary matter consists of hydrogen and helium located in interstellar and intergalactic space. only about one-half of 1% of the critical density of the universe is found in stars. dark matter and dark energy, which have not yet been detected in earthbound laboratories, account for 95% of the contents of the universe.
what different kinds of objects contribute to the density of the universe object density as a percent of critical density luminous matter (stars, etc.) <1 hydrogen and helium in interstellar and intergalactic space 4 dark matter 27 equivalent mass density of the dark energy 68 table 29.2 this table should shock you. what we are saying is that 95% of the stuff of the universe is either dark matter or dark energy—neither of which has ever been detected in a laboratory here on earth. this whole textbook, which has focused on objects that emit electromagnetic radiation, has generally been ignoring 95% of what is out there. who says there aren’t big mysteries yet to solve in science! figure 29.22 shows how our ideas of the composition of the universe have changed over just the past three decades. the fraction of the universe that we think is made of the same particles as astronomy students has been decreasing steadily. 29.5 • what is the universe really made of? 1035 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1053_img1.jpeg] figure 29.22 changing estimates of the content of the universe. this diagram shows the changes in our understanding of the contents of the universe over the past three decades.
in the 1970s, we suspected that most of the matter in the universe was invisible, but we thought that this matter might be ordinary matter (protons, neutrons, etc.) that was simply not producing electromagnetic radiation. by the 1980s, it was becoming likely that most of the dark matter was made of something we had not yet detected on earth. by the late 1990s, a variety of experiments had shown that we live in a critical -density universe and that dark energy contributes about 70% of what is required to reach critical density. note how the estimate of the relative importance of ordinary luminous matter (shown in yellow) has diminished over time. what is dark matter? many astronomers find the situation we have described very satisfying. several independent experiments now agree on the type of universe we live in and on the inventory of what it contains. we seem to be very close to having a cosmological model that explains nearly everything. others are not yet ready to jump on the bandwagon.
they say, “show me the 96% of the universe we can’t detect directly—for example, find me some dark matter!” at first, astronomers thought that dark matter might be hidden in objects that appear dark because they emit no light (e.g., black holes) or that are too faint to be observed at large distances (e.g., planets or white dwarfs). however, these objects would be made of ordinary matter, and the deuterium abundance tells us that no more than 5% of the critical density consists of ordinary matter. another possible form that dark matter can take is some type of elementary particle that we have not yet detected here on earth—a particle that has mass and exists in sufficient abundance to contribute 23% of the critical density. some physics theories predict the existence of such particles. one class of these particles has been given the name wimps, which stands for weakly interacting massive particles. since these particles do not participate in nuclear reactions leading to the production of deuterium, the deuterium abundance puts no limits on how many wimps might be in the universe.