all these wonderful new observations illustrate how dangerous it can be to draw conclusions about a phenomenon in science (in this case, how planetary systems form and arrange themselves) when you are only working with a single example. exoplanets have given rise to a new picture of planetary system formation—one that is much more chaotic than we originally thought. if we think of the planets as being like skaters in a rink, our original model (with only our own solar system as a guide) assumed that the planets behaved like polite skaters, all obeying the rules of the rink and all moving in nearly the same direction, following roughly circular paths. the new picture corresponds more to a roller derby, where the skaters crash into one another, change directions, and sometimes are thrown entirely out of the rink. habitable exoplanets while thousands of exoplanets have been discovered in the past two decades, every observational technique has fallen short of finding more than a few candidates that resemble earth (figure 21.27). astronomers are not sure exactly what properties would define another earth. do we need to find a planet that is exactly the same size and mass as earth? that may be difficult and may not be important from the perspective of habitability.
after all, we have no reason to think that life could not have arisen on earth if our planet had been a little bit smaller or larger. and, remember that how habitable a planet is depends on both its distance from its star and the nature of its atmosphere. the greenhouse effect can make some planets warmer (as it did for venus and is doing more and more for earth). 732 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org figure 21.27 many earthlike planets. this painting, commissioned by nasa, conveys the idea that there may be many planets resembling earth out there as our methods for finding them improve. (credit: nasa/jpl-caltech/r. hurt (ssc-caltech)) we can ask other questions to which we don’t yet know the answers. does this “twin” of earth need to orbit a solar-type star, or can we consider as candidates the numerous exoplanets orbiting k- and m-class stars?
(in the summer of 2016, astronomers reported the discovery of a planet with at least 1.3 times the mass of earth around the nearest star, proxima centauri, which is spectral type m and located 4.2 light years from us.) we have a special interest in finding planets that could support life like ours, in which case, we need to find exoplanets within their star’s habitable zone, where surface temperatures are consistent with liquid water on the surface. this is probably the most important characteristic defining an earth-analog exoplanet. the search for potentially habitable worlds is one of the prime drivers for exoplanet research in the next decade. astronomers are beginning to develop realistic plans for new instruments that can even look for signs of life on distant worlds (examining their atmospheres for gases associated with life, for example). if we require telescopes in space to find such worlds, we need to recognize that years are required to plan, build, and launch such space observatories. the discovery of exoplanets and the knowledge that most stars have planetary systems are transforming our thinking about life beyond earth. we are closer than ever to knowing whether habitable (and inhabited) planets are common.
this work lends a new spirit of optimism to the search for life elsewhere, a subject to which we will return in life in the universe. you can examine the habitability of planets in various star systems using the circumstellar habitable zone simulator (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/30cirhabzonsim) interactive. note that this app has a lot of different features and takes a little time to get used to.