(given all the narrow rings we see, some scientists still hope to find another more satisfactory mechanism for keeping them confined.) one of the outstanding problems with understanding the rings is determining their ages. have the giant planets always had the ring systems we see today, or might these be a recent or temporary, feature of the solar system? most of the research on this problem concerns the rings of saturn, which have been intensively studied, thanks to data from the cassini mission that orbited saturn for 13 years. the mass of these rings is about the same as that of the inner moon mimas, suggesting that they could have been formed by the break- up of a similar icy moon. such a violent event would have been more likely early in the history of the solar system, when there was more debris orbiting the sun. however, recent analyses of cassini data indicate that the rings may be relatively young, less than a few hundred million years old. the evidence is based on estimates of the inflow of dark, carbon-rich dust into the saturn system, which would gradually darken the icy ring particles. yet the rings of saturn actually reflect light very well, meaning they are not particularly dark.
the origin and age of the ring systems thus remains one of the intriguing mysteries of the solar system. link to learning 12.5 • planetary rings (and enceladus) 425 [image: astronomy_openstax_page443_img1.jpeg] key terms resonance an orbital condition in which one object is subject to periodic gravitational perturbations by another, most commonly arising when two objects orbiting a third have periods of revolution that are simple multiples or fractions of each other tidal heating the heating of a planet or moon’s interior by variable tidal forces caused by changing gravitational pull from a nearby planet or moon summary 12.1 ring and moon systems introduced the four jovian planets are accompanied by impressive systems of moons and rings. over 200 moons have been discovered in the outer solar system. of the four ring systems, saturn’s is the largest and is composed primarily of water ice; in contrast, uranus and neptune have narrow rings of dark material, and jupiter has a tenuous ring of dust. 12.2 the galilean moons of jupiter jupiter’s largest moons are ganymede and callisto, both low-density objects that are composed of more than half water ice.
callisto has an ancient cratered surface, while ganymede shows evidence of extensive tectonic and volcanic activity, persisting until perhaps a billion years ago. io and europa are denser and smaller, each about the size of our moon. io is the most volcanically active object in the solar system. various lines of evidence indicate that europa has a global ocean of liquid water under a thick ice crust. many scientists think that europa may offer the most favorable environment in the solar system to search for life. 12.3 titan and triton saturn’s moon titan has an atmosphere that is thicker than that of earth. there are lakes and rivers of liquid hydrocarbons, and evidence of a cycle of evaporation, condensation, and return to the surface that is similar to the water cycle on earth (but with liquid methane and ethane). the cassini-huygens lander set down on titan and showed a scene with boulders, made of water ice, frozen harder than rock. neptune’s cold moon triton has a very thin atmosphere and nitrogen gas geysers.
12.4 pluto and charon pluto and charon have been revealed by the new horizons spacecraft to be two of the most fascinating objects in the outer solar system. pluto is small (a dwarf planet) but also surprisingly active, with contrasting areas of dark cratered terrain, light-colored basins of nitrogen ice, and mountains of frozen water that may be floating in the nitrogen ice. even pluto’s largest moon charon shows evidence of geological activity. both pluto and charon turn out to be far more dynamic and interesting than could have been imagined before the new horizons mission. 12.5 planetary rings (and enceladus) rings are composed of vast numbers of individual particles orbiting so close to a planet that its gravitational forces could have broken larger pieces apart or kept small pieces from gathering together. saturn’s rings are broad, flat, and nearly continuous, except for a handful of gaps. the particles are mostly water ice, with typical dimensions of a few centimeters. one saturn moon, enceladus, is today erupting geysers of water to maintain the tenuous e ring, which is composed of very small ice crystals. the rings of uranus are narrow ribbons separated by wide gaps and contain much less mass.