astronomy basics 6.2 • telescopes today 197 [image: astronomy_openstax_page215_img1.jpeg] even when astronomers are observing with large telescopes, they seldom peer through them. electronic detectors permanently record the data for detailed analysis later. at some observatories, observations may be made remotely, with the astronomer sitting at a computer thousands of miles away from the telescope. time on major telescopes is at a premium, and an observatory director will typically receive many more requests for telescope time than can be accommodated during the year. astronomers must therefore write a convincing proposal explaining how they would like to use the telescope and why their observations will be important to the progress of astronomy. a committee of astronomers is then asked to judge and rank the proposals, and time is assigned only to those with the greatest merit. even if your proposal is among the high-rated ones, you may have to wait many months for your turn. if the skies are cloudy on the nights you have been assigned, it may be more than a year before you get another chance. some older astronomers still remember long, cold nights spent alone in an observatory dome, with only music from a tape recorder or an all-night radio station for company.
the sight of the stars shining brilliantly hour after hour through the open slit in the observatory dome was unforgettable. so, too, was the relief as the first pale light of dawn announced the end of a 12-hour observation session. astronomy is much easier today, with teams of observers working together, often at their computers, in a warm room. those who are more nostalgic, however, might argue that some of the romance has gone from the field, too. 6.3 visible-light detectors and instruments learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: after a telescope collects radiation from an astronomical source, the radiation must be detected and measured. the first detector used for astronomical observations was the human eye, but it suffers from being connected to an imperfect recording and retrieving device—the human brain. photography and modern electronic detectors have eliminated the quirks of human memory by making a permanent record of the information from the cosmos. the eye also suffers from having a very short integration time; it takes only a fraction of a second to add light energy together before sending the image to the brain.
one important advantage of modern detectors is that the light from astronomical objects can be collected by the detector over longer periods of time; this technique is called “taking a long exposure.” exposures of several hours are required to detect very faint objects in the cosmos. before the light reaches the detector, astronomers today normally use some type of instrument to sort the light according to wavelength. the instrument may be as simple as colored filters, which transmit light within a specified range of wavelengths. a red transparent plastic is an everyday example of a filter that transmits only the red light and blocks the other colors. after the light passes through a filter, it forms an image that astronomers can then use to measure the apparent brightness and color of objects. we will show you many examples of such images in the later chapters of this book, and we will describe what we can learn from them. alternatively, the instrument between telescope and detector may be one of several devices that spread the light out into its full rainbow of colors so that astronomers can measure individual lines in the spectrum. such an instrument (which you learned about in the chapter on radiation and spectra) is called a spectrometer because it allows astronomers to measure (to meter) the spectrum of a source of radiation.
whether a filter or describe the difference between photographic plates and charge-coupled devices describe the unique difficulties associated with infrared observations and their solutions describe how a spectrometer works 198 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org a spectrometer, both types of wavelength-sorting instruments still have to use detectors to record and measure the properties of light. photographic and electronic detectors throughout most of the twentieth century, photographic film or glass plates served as the prime astronomical detectors, whether for photographing spectra or direct images of celestial objects. in a photographic plate, a light-sensitive chemical coating is applied to a piece of glass that, when developed, provides a lasting record of the image. at observatories around the world, vast collections of photographs preserve what the sky has looked like during the past 100 years. photography represents a huge improvement over the human eye, but it still has limitations. photographic films are inefficient: only about 1% of the light that actually falls on the film contributes to the chemical change that makes the image; the rest is wasted. astronomers today have much more efficient electronic detectors to record astronomical images.