(additional legacies of arabic astronomy carry over even to the current day, where many star-names are latinized versions of arabic names, as are terms like azimuth and zenith.) the re-acquisition of the greek legacy was gradual (since the number of translators fluent in both arabic and latin was limited), and not without controversy. but in less than two hundred years, western europe went through a complete intellectual overhaul. even the church was forced to make accommodations, which it did mainly through the work of thomas aquinas. the result was that by the early 14th century ce, a christianized version of plato and aristotle had become officially sanctioned by the church. if no conflict with scripture could be detected, then aristotle’s science was the accepted channel for any interpretation of natural phenomena. this meant that geocentrism was the official cosmology of christian theology, and the almagest became the accepted model of astronomy in the west. this table is for the planet mercury from the alfonsine tables (ca. 1275), made at the behest of alfonso x of castile.
although latin had displaced greek, and arabic numerals had displaced the greek notation, claudius ptolemy would have been right at home with this table. despite the translation from greek to syriac to arabic and finally to latin, no radical changes had been made to his system in over a millennium. so the stage was now set for a young polish scholar who was just trying to please his uncle, and irritate his father. nicolaus copernicus (1473-1543) copernicus (born mikolaj kopernik in torun, poland) is most remembered for initiating a revolution in astronomy, even though he did not view himself as a revolutionary. on the contrary, his intention seems to have been to revive what he and other renaissance scholars thought was the true pythagorean ideal of astronomy, including mathematical and mystical interpretations of that ancient philosophy.
in an early draft of his seminal work, de revolutionibus orbium coelestium (on the revolutions of the celestial spheres, 1543), copernicus even made reference to the work of aristarchus, who we recall introduced the heliocentric system (the final draft of the 1543 edition did not include this reference for reasons unknown). so copernicus was not a forward thinker – he took his inspiration from an ideal past. this was in keeping with the whole approach of renaissance humanism. copernicus was about ten years old when his father died and was then adopted by his uncle, lucas watzenrode, who was a church official. uncle lucas was made bishop of warmia in 1489, which conferred significant status and wealth on the household. realizing his nephew’s potential, he sent copernicus first to the university of krakow and later to universities in bologna and padua, in italy. by 1503, copernicus had received degrees in both canon law and astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 431 medicine in order to serve as his uncle’s private secretary and physician.
it is believed that copernicus underwent minor orders, but did not become an ordained priest. after the death of his uncle in 1512, he was made a canon (an administrator) at frombork cathedral, a position he occupied for the rest of his life. it was at this time that he first went public, in a small way, with an outline called the commentariolus, where he introduced his heliocentric astronomy. the commentariolus was only circulated among a handful of friends, but by 1533 it had finally reached rome, where he was encouraged to enlarge and elaborate his system because of a growing interest in calendar reform by the church. but copernicus hesitated, not for fear of accusations of heresy (since the church was actually encouraging him), but for fear of ridicule. others before him had offered up new theories, only to be attacked and rejected by scholars and theologians. this might have been the end of it had not a young protestant professor at the university of wittenberg, georg rheticus, gotten wind of the theory and personally goaded copernicus into releasing the full version.