the recent discovery of thousands of planets in orbit around other stars has shown astronomers that many exoplanetary systems can be quite different from our own solar system. for example, it is common for these systems to include planets intermediate in size between our terrestrial and giant planets. these are often called superearths. some exoplanet systems even have giant planets close to the star, reversing the order we see in our system. in the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system, we will look at these exoplanet systems. but for now, let us focus on theories of how our own particular system has formed and evolved. looking for patterns one way to approach our question of origin is to look for regularities among the planets. we found, for example, that all the planets lie in nearly the same plane and revolve in the same direction around the sun. the sun also spins in the same direction about its own axis. astronomers interpret this pattern as evidence that the sun and planets formed together from a spinning cloud of gas and dust that we call the solar nebula (figure 7.17). figure 7.17 solar nebula.
this artist’s conception of the solar nebula shows the flattened cloud of gas and dust from which our planetary system formed. icy and rocky planetesimals (precursors of the planets) can be seen in the foreground. the bright center is where the sun is forming. (credit: william k. hartmann, planetary science institute) the composition of the planets gives another clue about origins. spectroscopic analysis allows us to determine describe the characteristics of planets that are used to create formation models of the solar system describe how the characteristics of extrasolar systems help us to model our own solar system explain the importance of collisions in the formation of the solar system 7.4 • origin of the solar system 245 [image: astronomy_openstax_page263_img1.jpeg] which elements are present in the sun and the planets. the sun has the same hydrogen-dominated composition as jupiter and saturn, and therefore appears to have been formed from the same reservoir of material. in comparison, the terrestrial planets and our moon are relatively deficient in the light gases and the various ices that form from the common elements oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen. instead, on earth and its neighbors, we see mostly the rarer heavy elements such as iron and silicon.
this pattern suggests that the processes that led to planet formation in the inner solar system must somehow have excluded much of the lighter materials that are common elsewhere. these lighter materials must have escaped, leaving a residue of heavy stuff. the reason for this is not hard to guess, bearing in mind the heat of the sun. the inner planets and most of the asteroids are made of rock and metal, which can survive heat, but they contain very little ice or gas, which evaporate when temperatures are high. (to see what we mean, just compare how long a rock and an ice cube survive when they are placed in the sunlight.) in the outer solar system, where it has always been cooler, the planets and their moons, as well as icy dwarf planets and comets, are composed mostly of ice and gas. the evidence from far away a second approach to understanding the origins of the solar system is to look outward for evidence that other systems of planets are forming elsewhere. we cannot look back in time to the formation of our own system, but many stars in space are much younger than the sun. in these systems, the processes of planet formation might still be accessible to direct observation.
we observe that there are many other “solar nebulas” or circumstellar disks—flattened, spinning clouds of gas and dust surrounding young stars. these disks resemble our own solar system’s initial stages of formation billions of years ago (figure 7.18). figure 7.18 atlas of planetary nurseries. these hubble space telescope photos show sections of the orion nebula, a relatively close-by region where stars are currently forming. each image shows an embedded circumstellar disk orbiting a very young star. seen from different angles, some are energized to glow by the light of a nearby star while others are dark and seen in silhouette against the bright glowing gas of the orion nebula. each is a contemporary analog of our own solar nebula—a location where planets are probably being formed today. (credit: modification of work by nasa/esa, l. ricci (eso)) building planets circumstellar disks are a common occurrence around very young stars, suggesting that disks and stars form together. astronomers can use theoretical calculations to see how solid bodies might form from the gas and dust in these disks as they cool.