the definition of a star is that it must have fusion of hydrogen into helium occuring within its core. white dwarfs white dwarfs are not the white stars that occur on the main sequence. white dwarfs are the remnants of former stars. stars that are the size of the sun or smaller, when they run low on fuel for their fusion reactions, will result in the formation of a compressed core of the star. it will be made of hydrogen, helium, and sometimes carbon. these embers are the superhot cores of the former stars, radiating their heat into space until they reach the same temperature of the surrounding space. white dwarfs are found in the bottom left of the hr diagram. a white dwarf is the collapsed core of a star. gravity has caused the electrons to be so tightly packed that they are pushed up against each other. this is called the electron degeneracy pressure. the upper limit of the mass of a white dwarf stellar remnant is 1.4 solar masses and is called the chandrasekhar limit. black dwarfs black dwarfs are the endpoint of a white dwarfs’ life. after the white dwarf has cooled to the temperature of local space, it will no longer be glowing at any frequencies.
the universe is not old enough to have any black dwarfs at this time. brown dwarfs some of the time, as stars are forming out of the interstellar medium, there is not enough mass available. the material forms into the shape of a star, but its gravity is insufficient to create the temperatures and pressures required for nuclear fusion of hydrogen. if they are too small, they will become planets like jupiter. but there is an intermediate size as well. one of the things that was formed in the big bang was deuterium. this element is really a form of hydrogen but its nucleus, in addition to the proton, has a neutron as well. a brown dwarf has enough mass to create the pressure and temperature needed to fuse this deuterium into helium. this partial fusion process differentiates the brown dwarfs from the planets. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 262 one challenge facing astronomers is: when an object is discovered orbitting a distant star, is it a large planet, or is it a brown dwarf? there is some overlap in their masses based on the materials in the star’s composition.
astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 263 table 30: the sun's childhood stages stage core temperature surface temperature diameter length of time name 1 10 k 10 k dust cloud 2 10 k 10 k 1*1014 km 2*106 yr fragmentation 3 10,000 k 100 k 1*1010 km 1*105 yr condensation 4 5,000,000 k 4000 k 1*107 km 1*107 yr protostar 5 10,000,000 k 4500 k 2*106 km 3*107 yr star 6 15,000,000 k 6000 k 1.5*106 km 1*1010 yr main sequence figure 304: dust cloud: the horsehead nebula figure 305: dust cloud fragmentation component 110 – the sun’s childhood all stars start life as large clouds of dust and gas in space. as the material condenses into stars, the stages that the star progresses through vary based on the amount of mass available to each star.
we will start by looking at the process of the development of the sun, or stars like the sun, from the dust cloud to the main sequence. stage 1: dust cloud the first stage of a star’s life is a dust cloud. this cloud is stable and in equilibrium. it could exist in this state for a very long time. something disturbs the calm state of the cloud, and pieces begin to collapse. this could be the end of a large star’s life - a supernova, or it could even be a shockwave from the birth of a nearby star. once the matter in the cloud has been disturbed, the state of equilibrium in the cloud is lost and the cloud begins to collapse and fragment due to its own gravity. these clouds are so large that many stars form out of the same dust cloud at approximately the same time. stage 2: dust cloud fragmentation the diameter of the fragment that would be used to make a sun-like star would be approximately 1*1014 km. as these regions collapse due to gravity, the cloud fragments into smaller clouds.