in a complex kind of modern dance, the large moons of jupiter are caught in the varying gravity grip of both the giant planet and each other. this leads to gravitational flexing or kneading in their centers, which can heat them—an effect called tidal heating. (a fuller explanation is given in the section on io.) we will see as we move inward to europa and io that the role of jovian tides becomes more important for moons close to the planet. europa, a moon with an ocean europa and io, the inner two galilean moons, are not icy worlds like most of the moons of the outer planets. with densities and sizes similar to our moon, they appear to be predominantly rocky objects. how did they fail to acquire a majority share of the ice that must have been plentiful in the outer solar system at the time of their formation? the most probable cause is jupiter itself, which was hot enough to radiate a great deal of infrared energy during the first few million years after its formation. this infrared radiation would have heated the disk of material near the planet that would eventually coalesce into the closer moons.
thus, any ice near jupiter was vaporized, leaving europa and io with compositions similar to planets in the inner solar system. despite its mainly rocky composition, europa has an ice-covered surface, as astronomers have long known from examining spectra of sunlight reflected from it. in this it resembles earth, which has a layer of water on its surface, but in europa’s case the water is capped by a thick crust of ice. there are very few impact craters in this ice, indicating that the surface of europa is in a continual state of geological self-renewal. judging from crater counts, the surface must be no more than a few million years old, and perhaps substantially less. in terms of its ability to erase impact craters, europa is more geologically active than earth. when we look at close-up photos of europa, we see a strange, complicated surface (figure 12.5). for the most part, the icy crust is extremely smooth, but it is crisscrossed with cracks and low ridges that often stretch for 398 12 • rings, moons, and pluto access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page416_img1.jpeg] thousands of kilometers.
some of these long lines are single, but most are double or multiple, looking rather like the remnants of a colossal freeway system. figure 12.5 evidence for an ocean on europa. (a) a close-up of an area called conamara chaos is shown here with enhanced color. this view is 70 kilometers wide in its long dimension. it appears that conamara is a region where europa’s icy crust is (or recently was) relatively thin and there is easier access to the possible liquid or slushy ocean beneath. not anchored to solid crust underneath, many of the ice blocks here seem to have slid or rotated from their original positions. in fact, the formations seen here look similar to views of floating sea-ice and icebergs in earth’s arctic ocean. (b) in this high-resolution view, the ice is wrinkled and crisscrossed by long ridges. where these ridges intersect, we can see which ones are older and which younger; the younger ones cross over the older ones. while superficially this system of ridges resembles a giant freeway system on europa, the ridges are much wider than our freeways and are a natural result of the flexing of the moon.
(credit a: modification of work by nasa/jpl/university of arizona; credit b: modification of work by nasa/jpl) it is very difficult to make straight lines on a planetary surface. in discussing mars, we explained that when percival lowell saw what appeared to him to be straight lines (the so-called martian “canals”), he attributed them to the engineering efforts of intelligent beings. we now know the lines on mars were optical illusions, but the lines on europa are real. these long cracks can form in the icy crust if it is floating without much friction on an ocean of liquid water (figure 12.6). figure 12.6 very high-resolution galileo image of one young double ridge on europa. the area in this picture is only 15 kilometers across. it appears to have formed when viscous icy material was forced up through a long, straight crack in the crust. note how the young ridge going from top left toward bottom right lies on top of older features, which are themselves on top of even older ones. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl) the close-up galileo images appear to confirm the existence of a global ocean.