suppose you are part of a motorcade of cars accompanied by police who lead you past each light, even if it is red. so, too, when the early universe was opaque, radiation interacted with ordinary matter, imparting energy to it and carrying it along, sweeping past the concentrations of dark matter. now suppose the police leave the motorcade, which then encounters some red lights. the lights act as traffic traps; approaching cars now have to stop, and so they bunch up. likewise, after the early universe became transparent, ordinary matter interacted with radiation only occasionally and so could fall into the dark matter traps. the universe in a nutshell in the previous sections of this chapter, we traced the evolution of the universe progressively further back in time. astronomical discovery has followed this path historically, as new instruments and new techniques have allowed us to probe ever closer to the beginning of time. the rate of expansion of the universe was determined from measurements of nearby galaxies. determinations of the abundances of deuterium, helium, and lithium based on nearby stars and galaxies were used to put limits on how much ordinary matter is in the universe. the motions of stars in galaxies and of galaxies within clusters of galaxies could only be explained if there were large quantities of dark matter.
measurements of supernovae that exploded when the universe was about half as old as it is now indicated that the rate of expansion of the universe has sped up since those explosions occurred. observations of extremely faint galaxies show that galaxies had begun to form when the universe was only 400–500 million years old. and observations of the cmb confirmed early theories that the universe was initially very hot. but all this moving further and further backward in time might have left you a bit dizzy. so now let’s instead show how the universe evolves as time moves forward. figure 29.24 summarizes the entire history of the observable universe from the beginning in a single diagram. the universe was very hot when it began to expand. we have fossil remnants of the very early universe in the form of neutrons, protons, electrons, and neutrinos, and the atomic nuclei that formed when the universe was 3–4 minutes old: deuterium, helium, and a small amount of lithium. dark matter also remains, but we do not yet know what form it is in. 1038 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org figure 29.24 history of the universe.
this image summarizes the changes that have occurred in the universe during the last 13.8 billion years. protons, deuterium, helium, and some lithium were produced in the initial fireball. about 380,000 years after the big bang, the universe became transparent to electromagnetic radiation for the first time. cobe, wmap, planck, and other instruments have been used to study the radiation that was emitted at that time and that is still visible today (the cmb). the universe was then dark (except for this background radiation) until the first stars and galaxies began to form only a few hundred million years after the big bang. existing space and ground-based telescopes have made substantial progress in studying the subsequent evolution of galaxies. (credit: modification of work by nasa/wmap science team) the universe gradually cooled; when it was about 380,000 years old, and at a temperature of about 3000 k, electrons combined with protons to form hydrogen atoms. at this point, as we saw, the universe became transparent to light, and astronomers have detected the cmb emitted at this time.
the universe still contained no stars or galaxies, and so it entered what astronomers call “the dark ages” (since stars were not lighting up the darkness). during the next several hundred million years, small fluctuations in the density of the dark matter grew, forming gravitational traps that concentrated the ordinary matter, which began to form galaxies about 400–500 million years after the big bang. by the time the universe was about a billion years old, it had entered its own renaissance: it was again blazing with radiation, but this time from newly formed stars, star clusters, and small galaxies. over the next several billion years, small galaxies merged to form the giants we see today. clusters and superclusters of galaxies began to grow, and the universe eventually began to resemble what we see nearby. astronomers are now building giant new telescopes, both in space and on the ground, to explore further back in time. in 2022, the 6.5-meter james webb space telescope (see figure 29.1) was put into operation. with it, astronomers can detect distant galaxies whose great redshifts have moved much of the radiation they give off to the infrared.