think about it when you think about what you observe, you must try to fit what you see into your view of the world. if you see things you have never seen before, then you need to try to understand what you see. but, if you do not have a scientific method to analyze what you see, you only have the ability to apply what you know. this was the case for early scientists. as early as 2900 bc thinkers were beginning to apply the principles of philosophy. around 400 bc philosophy had evolved to the place where thinkers like aristotle were trying to define the world around them including the science that would grow into astronomy. early scientists eudoxus of cnidus (408-355 bc). eudoxus was a greek astronomer, mathematician, and scholar. he created models of the universe. the earth was a sphere at the center. to explain the moons motion he needed three spheres: the outermost for daily motion, the second for monthly motion, and a third to explain the changes above and below the ecliptic. he had a similar model to explain the motions of the sun including three spheres: the outermost for daily motion, then yearly motion, and a third for changes in declination.
the five visible planets (mercury, venus, mars, jupiter, and saturn) each had models consisting of four spheres: the outermost for daily motion, motion through the signs of the zodiac, and two inner spheres to explain retrograde motion. lastly there was a sphere for the distant stars. he is credited with being the first person to try to apply mathematical solutions to the observed motions of the heavens. aristotle and callippus were his students. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 52 callippus (370-300 bc). callippus was a greek astronomer and mathematician. he added 7 more spheres to the models of eudoxus; 2 for the sun, 2 for the moon, and one for each of the inner planets: mercury, venus, and mars. his observations of the sun indicated that the seasons were different lengths which implied the sun did not move at a constant speed along the ecliptic. he called this the solar anomaly. he created an accurate lunisolar calendar. aristotle (384-322 bc). aristotle was a greek philosopher who wrote 8 books related to physics.
some of his conclusions that relate to astronomy include: • a void is not only unnecessary but leads to contradictions. • time is a constant attribute of movements and does not exist on its own but is relative to the motions of things. time is defined as "the number of movement in respect to before and after", so it cannot exist without succession. • he described the celestial bodies thus: the first things to be moved must undergo an infinite, single and continuous movement, that is, circular. • the planets and stars, which have their source of motion within themselves (by virtue of aether), aspire to emulate the uniform circular motion of their particular mover. thus captivated, their tireless performance is entirely the result of their own desire. this is one way in which the movers are said to be unmoved. • he viewed the aether as a fifth element. it was divine and perfect. these conclusions implied a number of things that would have an effect on how humans would view the universe for centuries. some examples are: • the heavens are perfect beyond the moon. • the universe is filled with an aether. there is no vacuum. • time is unchanging as it marches forward. • everything travels in circles and spheres.
• the earth is the center of the universe. (geocentric, by ptolamy) figure 47: aristotle [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page52_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 53 figure 48: ptolemy’s model of the universe - geocentric drawing by pearson scott foresman the earth appeared to early humans to be the center of the universe. this is the geocentric model. it is wrong. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page53_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 54 component 14 – a scientific approach is born for 2000 years the philosophy of aristotle was dominating the science of astronomy. it was not until some brave scientists decided to challenge this philosophy based on new observations that the science of astronomy began to move ahead. those who cleared the field and planted the seeds nicolaus copernicus (1473-1543). copernicus did not create a heliocentric model of the solar system, but he is given much credit for popularizing it. he was a german mathematician and astronomer.