to observers before the invention of the telescope, it seemed that a new star suddenly appeared, and they called it a nova.3 novae fade away in a few months to a few years. hundreds of novae have been observed, each occurring in a binary star system and each later showing a shell of expelled material. a number of stars have more than one nova episode, as more material from its neighboring star accumulates on the white dwarf and the whole process repeats. as long as the episodes do not increase the mass of the white dwarf beyond the chandrasekhar limit (by transferring too much mass too quickly), the dense white dwarf itself remains pretty much unaffected by the explosions on its surface. white dwarf explosions: the violent kind if a white dwarf accumulates matter from a companion star at a much faster rate, it can be pushed over the chandrasekhar limit. the evolution of such a binary system is shown in figure 23.18. when its mass approaches the chandrasekhar mass limit (exceeds 1.4 msun), such an object can no longer support itself as a white dwarf, and it begins to contract.
as it does so, it heats up, and new nuclear reactions can begin in the describe the kind of binary star system that leads to a nova event describe the type of binary star system that leads to a type ia supernovae event indicate how type ia supernovae differ from type ii supernovae 3 we now know that this historical terminology is quite misleading since novae do not originate from new stars. in fact, quite to the contrary, novae originate from white dwarfs, which are actually the endpoint of stellar evolution for low-mass stars. but since the system of two stars was too faint to be visible to the naked eye, it did seem to people, before telescopes were invented, that a star had appeared where nothing had been visible. 23.5 • the evolution of binary star systems 803 degenerate core. the star “simmers” for the next century or so, building up internal temperature. this simmering phase ends in less than a second, when an enormous amount of fusion (especially of carbon) takes place all at once, resulting in an explosion. the fusion energy produced during the final explosion is so great that it completely destroys the white dwarf.
gases are blown out into space at velocities of about 10,000 kilometers per second, and afterward, no trace of the white dwarf remains. figure 23.18 evolution of a binary system. the more massive star evolves first to become a red giant and then a white dwarf. the white dwarf then begins to attract material from its companion, which in turn evolves to become a red giant. eventually, the white dwarf acquires so much mass that it is pushed over the chandrasekhar limit and becomes a type ia supernova. such an explosion is also called a supernova, since, like the destruction of a high-mass star, it produces a huge amount of energy in a very short time. however, unlike the explosion of a high-mass star, which can leave behind a neutron star or black hole remnant, the white dwarf is completely destroyed in the process, leaving behind no remnant. we call these white dwarf explosions type ia supernovae. we distinguish type i supernovae from those of supernovae of type ii originating from the death of massive stars discussed earlier by the absence of hydrogen in their observed spectra. hydrogen is the most common element in the universe and is a major component of massive, evolved stars.
however, as we learned earlier, hydrogen is absent from the white dwarf remnant, which is primarily composed of carbon and oxygen for masses comparable to the chandrasekhar mass limit. the “a” subdesignation of type ia supernovae further refers to the presence of strong silicon absorption lines, which are absent from supernovae originating from the collapse of massive stars. silicon is one of the products that results from the fusion of carbon and oxygen, which bears out the scenario we described above—that there is a sudden onset of the fusion of the carbon (and oxygen) of which the white dwarf was made. observational evidence now strongly indicates that sn 1006, tycho’s supernova, and kepler’s supernova (see supernovae in history) were all type ia supernovae. for instance, in contrast to the case of sn 1054, which yielded the spinning pulsar in the crab nebula, none of these historical supernovae shows any evidence of stellar remnants that have survived their explosions. perhaps even more puzzling is that, so far, astronomers have not been able to identify the companion star feeding the white dwarf in any of these historical supernovae.