these two theories, special relativity and general relativity, both play a central role in our understanding of how space and time behave in the vicinity of a black hole. special theory of relativity in 1905 einstein proposed this theory. light, no matter how fast the speed of the source or the receptor of that light, has a speed limit. this is the familiar 186,000 miles per second or 300,000 kilometers per second. this concept is very different from what we know and experience in traditional physics, where velocities add and subtract to give the apparent velocity. when we talk about speeds that are very fast, speeds that are a significant fraction of the speed of light, then the old rules do not apply. the new theory presents us with a few new rules: • the speed of light, c, is a speed limit. nothing can move faster than the speed of light, and it is constant. • all observers will see the speed of light as exactly the same speed no matter how fast they are moving, and no matter how fast the source of the light is moving. • there is no absolute inertial frame of reference in the universe. everything in the universe is moving relative to everything else. there is no preferred location in the universe.
• space and time are linked together. you can’t consider one without the other. it is called spacetime. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 306 figure 351: curvature of space diagram by nasa • an object moving close to the speed of light will shorten in the dimension in which it is travelling. this is called the lorentz contraction. • time on an object moving close to the speed of light slows down. this is known as time dilation. • the mass of an object moving close to the speed of light increases. • energy and mass are related using the famous equation: e = m * c2. general theory of relativity in 1915 einstein was able to work gravity into relativity. special relativity deals with velocities but not acceleration. einstein realized that gravity was no different than other forms of acceleration acting on an object. this is called the equivalence principle. einstein was famous for his thought experiments, and one such experiment played a major role in the development of the general theory of relativity.
if you take two people and place them in a sealed elevator with no windows, and place one of them on earth and the other behind a rocket ship accelerating with the same force as the gravity, neither one would be able to tell you which person was in which situation. this enhanced theory presents us with some additional new rules: • objects with mass warp spacetime in their vicinity. the more mass, the more curvature. • objects near the mass follow the lines of the curvature of spacetime (like contour lines on a topographical map). this explains how satellites orbit the earth, as well as how the earth orbits the sun. it also explains how light curves around the sun during a total solar eclipse. at that time, we are able to see stars that are actually behind the sun. black holes now imagine what happens in the vicinity of a black hole. space becomes very tightly curved and actually curves in upon itself. if you are within this curvature, there is no means to escape. all objects have an escape velocity. that velocity decreases as the distance increases.
in the [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page306_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 307 figure 352: gravitational redshift diagram by kasuga there is a gravitational redshift due to the mass of nearby objects case of a black hole, the event horizon is that point where the escape velocity is equal to the speed of light. since nothing can travel faster than that, nothing, including light, can escape. the gravitational force increases significantly as an object approaches a black hole’s event horizon. eventually, the force at the front end of the object is so much greater than the gravitational force on the back end of the object, the object is pulled apart. as the pieces get closer to the black hole, the effect continues and stronger forces pull the object into smaller pieces until it is loose atoms. this has been commonly referred to as spaghetification. as this occurs, the materials heat up. as they approach the event horizon they heat so much that they are emitting x-rays. we can see these emissions, until the matter falls into the event horizon, and then we see nothing. in addition to these physical effects, but separate, is a change to the electromagnetic radiation that is being emitted.