so instead, hubble sampled the sky in many regions, much as herschel did with his star gauging (see the architecture of the galaxy). in the 1930s, hubble photographed 1283 sample areas, and on each print, he carefully counted the numbers of galaxy images (figure 28.13). the first discovery hubble made from his survey was that the number of galaxies visible in each area of the sky is about the same. (strictly speaking, this is true only if the light from distant galaxies is not absorbed by dust in our own galaxy, but hubble made corrections for this absorption.) he also found that the numbers of galaxies increase with faintness, as we would expect if the density of galaxies is about the same at all distances from us. to understand what we mean, imagine you are taking snapshots in a crowded stadium during a sold-out concert. the people sitting near you look big, so only a few of them will fit into a photo. but if you focus on the people sitting in seats way on the other side of the stadium, they look so small that many more will fit into your picture.
if all parts of the stadium have the same seat arrangements, then as you look farther and farther away, your photo will get more and more crowded with people. in the same way, as hubble looked at fainter and fainter galaxies, he saw more and more of them. figure 28.13 hubble at work. edwin hubble at the 100-inch telescope on mount wilson. (credit: nasa) hubble’s findings are enormously important, for they indicate that the universe is both isotropic and homogeneous—it looks the same in all directions, and a large volume of space at any given redshift or distance is much like any other volume at that redshift. if that is so, it does not matter what section of the universe we observe (as long as it’s a sizable portion): any section will look the same as any other. hubble’s results—and many more that have followed in the nearly 100 years since then—imply not only that the universe is about the same everywhere (apart from changes with time) but also that aside from small-scale local differences, the part we can see around us is representative of the whole.
the idea that the universe is the same everywhere is called the cosmological principle and is the starting assumption for nearly all theories that describe the entire universe (see the big bang). without the cosmological principle, we could make no progress at all in studying the universe. suppose our own local neighborhood were unusual in some way. then we could no more understand what the universe is like than if we were marooned on a warm south-sea island without outside communication and were trying to understand the geography of earth. from our limited island vantage point, we could not know that some parts of the planet are covered with snow and ice, or that large continents exist with a much greater variety of 28.3 • the distribution of galaxies in space 971 [image: astronomy_openstax_page989_img1.jpeg] terrain than that found on our island. hubble merely counted the numbers of galaxies in various directions without knowing how far away most of them were. with modern instruments, astronomers have measured the velocities and distances of hundreds of thousands of galaxies, and so built up a meaningful picture of the large-scale structure of the universe. in the rest of this section, we describe what we know about the distribution of galaxies, beginning with those that are nearby.
the local group the region of the universe for which we have the most detailed information is, as you would expect, our own local neighborhood. it turns out that the milky way galaxy is a member of a small group of galaxies called, not too imaginatively, the local group. it is spread over about 3 million light-years and contains 60 or so members. there are three large spiral galaxies (our own, the andromeda galaxy, and m33), two intermediate ellipticals, and many dwarf ellipticals and irregular galaxies. new members of the local group are still being discovered. we mentioned in the milky way galaxy a dwarf galaxy only about 80,000 light-years from earth and about 50,000 light-years from the center of the galaxy that was discovered in 1994 in the constellation of sagittarius. (this dwarf is actually venturing too close to the much larger milky way and will eventually be consumed by it.) many of the recent discoveries have been made possible by the new generation of automated, sensitive, wide- field surveys, such as the sloan digital sky survey, that map the positions of millions of stars across most of the visible sky.