mcconnell, chung-pei ma, “revisiting the scaling relations of black hole masses and host galaxy properties,” the astrophysical journal, 764:184 (14 pp.), february 20, 2013.) somehow black hole mass and the mass of the surrounding bulge of stars are connected. but why does this correlation exist? unfortunately, astronomers do not yet know the answer to this question. we do know, however, that the black hole can influence the rate of star formation in the galaxy, and that the properties of the surrounding galaxy can influence how fast the black hole grows. let’s see how these processes work. 27.3 • quasars as probes of evolution in the universe 945 [image: astronomy_openstax_page963_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page963_img2.jpeg] how a galaxy can influence a black hole in its center let’s look first at how the surrounding galaxy might influence the growth and size of the black hole. without large quantities of fresh “food,” the surroundings of black holes glow only weakly as bits of local material spiral inward toward the black hole.
so somehow large amounts of gas have to find their way to the black hole from the galaxy in order to feed the quasar and make it grow and give off the energy to be noticed. where does this “food” for the black hole come from originally and how might it be replenished? the jury is still out, but the options are pretty clear. one obvious source of fuel for the black hole is matter from the host galaxy itself. galaxies start out with large amounts of interstellar gas and dust, and at least some of this interstellar matter is gradually converted into stars as the galaxy evolves. on the other hand, as stars go through their lives and die, they lose mass all the time into the space between them, thereby returning some of the gas and dust to the interstellar medium. we expect to find more gas and dust in the central regions early in a galaxy’s life than later on, when much of it has been converted into stars. any of the interstellar matter that ventures too close to the black hole may be accreted by it. this means that we would expect that the number and luminosity of quasars powered in this way would decline with time. and as we have seen, that is just what we find.
today both elliptical galaxies and the nuclear bulges of spiral galaxies have very little raw material left to serve as a source of fuel for the black hole. and most of the giant black holes in nearby galaxies, including the one in our own milky way, are now dark and relatively quiet—mere shadows of their former selves. so that fits with our observations. we should note that even if you have a quiescent supermassive black hole, a star in the area could occasionally get close to it. then the powerful tidal forces of the black hole can pull the whole star apart into a stream of gas. this stream quickly forms an accretion disk that gives off energy in the normal way and makes the black hole region into a temporary quasar. however, the material will fall into the black hole after only a few weeks or months. the black hole then goes back into its lurking, quiescent state, until another victim wanders by. this sort of “cannibal” event happens only once every 100,000 years or so in a typical galaxy. but we can monitor millions of galaxies in the sky, so a few of these “tidal disruption events” are found each year (figure 27.17).
however, these individual events, dramatic as they are, are too rare to account for the huge masses of the central black holes. figure 27.17 a black hole snacks on a star. this artist’s impression shows three stages of a star (red) swinging too close to a giant black hole (black circle). the star starts off (top left) in its normal spherical shape, then begins to be pulled into a long football shape 946 27 • active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page964_img1.jpeg] by tides raised by the black hole (center). when the star gets closer still, the tides become stronger than the gravity holding the star together, and it breaks up into a streamer (right). much of the star’s matter forms a temporary accretion disk that lights up as a quasar for a few weeks or months. (credit: modification of work by nasa/cxc/m. weiss) another source of fuel for the black hole is the collision of its host galaxy with another galaxy. some of the brightest galaxies turn out, when a detailed picture is taken, to be pairs of colliding galaxies.