to be visible, a meteor must be within about 200 kilometers of the observer. on a typical dark, moonless night, an alert observer can see half a dozen meteors per hour. these sporadic meteors—those not associated with a meteor shower (explained in the next section)—are random occurrences. over the entire earth, the total number of meteors bright enough to be visible totals about 25 million per day. the typical meteor is produced by a particle with a mass of less than 1 gram—no larger than a pea. how can we see such a small particle? the light you see comes from the much larger region of heated, glowing gas surrounding this little grain of interplanetary material. because of its high speed, the energy in a pea-sized meteor is as great as that of an artillery shell fired on earth, but this energy is dispersed high in earth’s atmosphere. (when these tiny projectiles hit an airless body like the moon, they do make small craters and generally pulverize the surface.) if a particle the size of a golf ball strikes our atmosphere, it produces a much brighter trail called a fireball (figure 14.2).
a piece as large as a bowling ball has a fair chance of surviving its fiery entry if its approach speed is not too high. the total mass of meteoric material entering earth’s atmosphere is estimated to be about 100 tons per day (which seems like a lot if you imagine it all falling in one place, but remember it is spread out all over our planet’s surface). figure 14.2 fireball. when a larger piece of cosmic material strikes earth’s atmosphere, it can make a bright fireball. this time-lapse meteor image was captured in april 2014 at the atacama large millimeter/submillimeter array (alma). the visible trail results from the burning gas around the particle. (credit: modification of work by eso/c malin) explain what a meteor is and why it is visible in the night sky describe the origins of meteor showers 476 14 • cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page494_img1.jpeg] while it is difficult to capture images of fireballs and other meteors with still photography, it’s easy to capture the movement of these objects on video.
the american meteor society maintains a website (https://openstax.org/l/30ammetsocweb) on which their members can share such videos. meteor showers many—perhaps most—of the meteors that strike earth are associated with specific comets. some of these periodic comets still return to our view; others have long ago fallen apart, leaving only a trail of dust behind them. the dust particles from a given comet retain approximately the orbit of their parent, continuing to move together through space but spreading out over the orbit with time. when earth, in its travels around the sun, crosses such a dust stream, we see a sudden burst of meteor activity that usually lasts several hours; such an event is called a meteor shower. the dust particles and pebbles that produce meteor showers are moving together in space before they encounter earth. thus, as we look up at the atmosphere, their parallel paths seem to come toward us from a place in the sky called the radiant. this is the direction in space from which the meteor stream seems to be diverging, just as long railroad tracks seem to diverge from a single spot on the horizon (figure 14.3).
meteor showers are often designated by the constellation in which this radiant is located: for example, the perseid meteor shower has its radiant in the constellation of perseus. but you are likely to see shower meteors anywhere in the sky, not just in the constellation of the radiant. the characteristics of some of the more famous meteor showers are summarized in table 14.1. figure 14.3 radiant of a meteor shower. the tracks of the meteors diverge from a point in the distance, just as long, parallel railroad tracks appear to do.