spacecraft did obtain direct measurements of a comet nucleus, however, in 1986, when three spacecraft swept past comet halley at close range (see figure 13.20). subsequently, other spacecraft have flown close to other comets. in 2005, the 454 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page472_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page472_img2.jpeg] nasa deep impact spacecraft even carried a probe for a high-speed impact with the nucleus of comet tempel 1. but by far, the most productive study of a comet has been by the 2015 rosetta mission, which we will discuss shortly. figure 13.20 close-up of comet halley. this historic photograph of the black, irregularly shaped nucleus of comet halley was obtained by the esa giotto spacecraft from a distance of about 1000 kilometers. the bright areas are jets of material escaping from the surface. the length of the nucleus is 10 kilometers, and details as small as 1 kilometer can be made out.
(credit: modification of work by esa) the comet’s atmosphere the spectacular activity that allows us to see comets is caused by the evaporation of cometary ices heated by sunlight. beyond the asteroid belt, where comets spend most of their time, these ices are solidly frozen. but as a comet approaches the sun, it begins to warm up. if water (h2o) is the dominant ice, significant quantities vaporize as sunlight heats the surface above 200 k. this happens for the typical comet somewhat beyond the orbit of mars. the evaporating h2o in turn releases the dust that was mixed with the ice. since the comet’s nucleus is so small, its gravity cannot hold back either the gas or the dust, both of which flow away into space at speeds of about 1 kilometer per second. the comet continues to absorb energy as it approaches the sun. a great deal of this energy goes into the evaporation of its ice, as well as into heating the surface. however, recent observations of many comets indicate that the evaporation is not uniform and that most of the gas is released in sudden spurts, perhaps confined to a few areas of the surface.
expanding into space at a speed of about 1 kilometer per second, the comet’s atmosphere can reach an enormous size. the diameter of a comet’s head is often as large as jupiter, and it can sometimes approach a diameter of a million kilometers (figure 13.21). figure 13.21 head of comet halley. here we see the cloud of gas and dust that make up the head, or coma, of comet halley in 1986. on this scale, the nucleus (hidden inside the cloud) would be a dot too small to see. (credit: modification of work by nasa/w. liller) most comets also develop tails as they approach the sun. a comet’s tail is an extension of its atmosphere, consisting of the same gas and dust that make up its head. as early as the sixteenth century, observers realized that comet tails always point away from the sun (figure 13.22), not back along the comet’s orbit.
newton proposed that comet tails are formed by a repulsive force of sunlight driving particles away from the 13.3 • the “long-haired” comets 455 [image: astronomy_openstax_page473_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page473_img2.jpeg] head—an idea close to our modern view. figure 13.22 comet orbit and tail. the orientation of a typical comet tail changes as the comet passes perihelion. approaching the sun, the tail is behind the incoming comet head, but on the way out, the tail precedes the head. the two different components that make up the tail (the dust and gas) act somewhat differently. the brightest part of the tail is called the dust tail, to differentiate it from a fainter, straight tail made of ionized gas, called the ion tail. the ion tail is carried outward by streams of ions (charged particles) emitted by the sun. as you can see in figure 13.23, the smoother dust tail curves a bit, as individual dust particles spread out along the comet’s orbit, whereas the straight ion tail is pushed more directly outward from the sun by our star’s wind of charged particles figure 13.23 comet tails.