there is a “citizen science” website called planet hunters (http://www.planethunters.org/) where you can participate in identifying exoplanets from the data that kepler provided. your group should access the site, work together to use it, and classify two light curves. report back to the class on what you have done. h. yuri milner, an israeli-american billionaire, recently pledged $100 million to develop the technology to send many miniaturized probes to a star in the alpha centauri triple star system (which includes proxima centauri, the nearest star to us, now known to have at least one planet.) each tiny probe will be propelled by powerful lasers at 20% the speed of light, in the hope that one or more might arrive safely and be able to send back information about what it’s like there. your group should search online for more information about this project (called “breakthrough: starshot”) and discuss your reactions to this project. give specific reasons for your arguments. exercises review questions 1. give several reasons the orion molecular cloud is such a useful “laboratory” for studying the stages of star formation.
738 21 • collaborative group activities access for free at openstax.org 2. why is star formation more likely to occur in cold molecular clouds than in regions where the temperature of the interstellar medium is several hundred thousand degrees? 3. why have we learned a lot about star formation since the invention of detectors sensitive to infrared radiation? 4. describe what happens when a star forms. begin with a dense core of material in a molecular cloud and trace the evolution up to the time the newly formed star reaches the main sequence. 5. describe how the t tauri star stage in the life of a low-mass star can lead to the formation of a herbig- haro (h-h) object. 6. look at the four stages shown in figure 21.8. in which stage(s) can we see the star in visible light? in infrared radiation? 7. the evolutionary track for a star of 1 solar mass remains nearly vertical in the h–r diagram for a while (see figure 21.12). how is its luminosity changing during this time? its temperature? its radius? 8.
two protostars, one 10 times the mass of the sun and one half the mass of the sun are born at the same time in a molecular cloud. which one will be first to reach the main sequence stage, where it is stable and getting energy from fusion? 9. compare the scale (size) of a typical dusty disk around a forming star with the scale of our solar system. 10. why is it so hard to see planets around other stars and so easy to see them around our own? 11. why did it take astronomers until 1995 to discover the first exoplanet orbiting another star like the sun? 12. which types of planets are most easily detected by doppler measurements? by transits? 13. list three ways in which the exoplanets we have detected have been found to be different from planets in our solar system. 14. list any similarities between discovered exoplanets and planets in our solar system. 15. what revisions to the theory of planet formation have astronomers had to make as a result of the discovery of exoplanets? 16. why are young jupiters easier to see with direct imaging than old jupiters? thought questions 17.
a friend of yours who did not do well in her astronomy class tells you that she believes all stars are old and none could possibly be born today. what arguments would you use to persuade her that stars are being born somewhere in the galaxy during your lifetime? 18. observations suggest that it takes more than 3 million years for the dust to begin clearing out of the inner regions of the disks surrounding protostars. suppose this is the minimum time required to form a planet. would you expect to find a planet around a 10-msun star? (refer to figure 21.12.) 19. suppose you wanted to observe a planet around another star with direct imaging. would you try to observe in visible light or in the infrared? why? would the planet be easier to see if it were at 1 au or 5 au from its star? 20. why were giant planets close to their stars the first ones to be discovered? why has the same technique not been used yet to discover giant planets at the distance of saturn? 21. exoplanets in eccentric orbits experience large temperature swings during their orbits. suppose you had to plan for a mission to such a planet.