the more the diagram spreads out horizontally, the faster the change in the velocity of expansion. after a period of very rapid expansion at the beginning, which scientists call inflation and which we will discuss later in this chapter, the expansion began to decelerate. galaxies were then close together, and their mutual gravitational attraction slowed the expansion. after a few billion years, when galaxies were farther apart, the influence of gravity began to weaken. dark energy then took over and caused the expansion to accelerate. (credit: modification of work by ann feild (stsci)) deceleration works to make the age of the universe estimated by the simple relation seem older than it really is, whereas acceleration works to make it seem younger. by happy coincidence, our best estimates of how much deceleration and acceleration occurred lead to an answer for the age very close to . the best current estimate is that the universe is 13.8 billion years old with an uncertainty of only about 100 million years. throughout this chapter, we have referred to the hubble constant. we now know that the hubble constant does change with time. it is, however, constant everywhere in the universe at any given time.
when we say the hubble constant is about 70 kilometers/second/million parsecs, we mean that this is the value of the hubble constant at the current time. comparing ages we now have one estimate for the age of the universe from its expansion. is this estimate consistent with other observations? for example, are the oldest stars or other astronomical objects younger than 13.8 billion years? after all, the universe has to be at least as old as the oldest objects in it. in our galaxy and others, the oldest stars are found in the globular clusters (figure 29.5), which can be dated using the models of stellar evolution described in the chapter stars from adolescence to old age. 29.1 • the age of the universe 1011 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1029_img1.jpeg] figure 29.5 globular cluster 47 tucanae. this nasa/esa hubble space telescope image shows a globular cluster known as 47 tucanae, since it is in the constellation of tucana (the toucan) in the southern sky. the second-brightest globular cluster in the night sky, it includes hundreds of thousands of stars.
globular clusters are among the oldest objects in our galaxy and can be used to estimate its age. (credit: nasa, esa, and the hubble heritage (stsci/aura)-esa/hubble collaboration) the accuracy of the age estimates of the globular clusters has improved markedly in recent years for two reasons. first, models of interiors of globular cluster stars have been improved, mainly through better information about how atoms absorb radiation as they make their way from the center of a star out into space. second, observations from satellites have improved the accuracy of our measurements of the distances to these clusters. the conclusion is that the oldest stars formed about 12–13 billion years ago. this age estimate has recently been confirmed by the study of the spectrum of uranium in the stars. the isotope uranium-238 is radioactive and decays (changes into another element) over time. (uranium-238 gets its designation because it has 92 protons and 146 neutrons.) we know (from how stars and supernovae make elements) how much uranium-238 is generally made compared to other elements. suppose we measure the amount of uranium relative to nonradioactive elements in a very old star and in our own sun, and compare the abundances.
with those pieces of information, we can estimate how much longer the uranium has been decaying in the very old star because we know from our own sun how much uranium decays in 4.5 billion years. the line of uranium is very weak and hard to make out even in the sun, but it has now been measured in one extremely old star using the european very large telescope (figure 29.6). comparing the abundance with that in the solar system, whose age we know, astronomers estimate the star is 12.5 billion years old, with an uncertainty of about 3 billion years. while the uncertainty is large, this work is important confirmation of the ages estimated by studies of the globular cluster stars. note that the uranium age estimate is completely independent; it does not depend on either the measurement of distances or on models of the interiors of stars. 1012 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1030_img1.jpeg] figure 29.6 european extremely large telescope, european very large telescope, and the colosseum. the european extremely large telescope (e-elt) is currently under construction in chile.