explain why these two effects don’t simply cancel each other, leading to no net temperature change. 38. an idealized radiating object does not reflect or scatter any radiation but instead absorbs all of the electromagnetic energy that falls on it. can you explain why astronomers call such an object a blackbody? keep in mind that even stars, which shine brightly in a variety of colors, are considered blackbodies. explain why. 39. why are ionized gases typically only found in very high-temperature environments? 40. explain why each element has a unique spectrum of absorption or emission lines. figuring for yourself 41. what is the wavelength of the carrier wave of a campus radio station, broadcasting at a frequency of 97.2 mhz (million cycles per second or million hertz)? 42. what is the frequency of a red laser beam, with a wavelength of 670 nm, which your astronomy instructor might use to point to slides during a lecture on galaxies? 43. you go to a dance club to forget how hard your astronomy midterm was. what is the frequency of a wave of ultraviolet light coming from a blacklight in the club, if its wavelength is 150 nm? 44.
what is the energy of the photon with the frequency you calculated in exercise 5.43? 45. if the emitted infrared radiation from pluto, has a wavelength of maximum intensity at 75,000 nm, what is the temperature of pluto assuming it follows wien’s law? 46. what is the temperature of a star whose maximum light is emitted at a wavelength of 290 nm? 180 5 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 6.1 james webb space telescope (jwst). the james webb space telescope, launched december 25, 2021, is the largest space telescope humanity has deployed so far. its 18 gold-coated beryllium segments make up a mirror for reflecting infrared light that is 6.5 meters in diameter. below it on our illustration you see the tennis-court-sized sunscreen that protects it from the heat of our star. the first webb science images were released in july 2022.
(credit: modification of work “artist’s impression of the nasa/esa/ csa james webb space telescope” by esa/atg medialab) chapter outline 6.1 telescopes 6.2 telescopes today 6.3 visible-light detectors and instruments 6.4 radio telescopes 6.5 observations outside earth’s atmosphere 6.6 the future of large telescopes thinking ahead if you look at the sky when you are far away from city lights, there seem to be an overwhelming number of stars up there. in reality, only about 9000 stars are visible to the unaided eye (from both hemispheres of our planet). the light from most stars is so weak that by the time it reaches earth, it cannot be detected by the human eye. how can we learn about the vast majority of objects in the universe that our unaided eyes simply cannot see? in this chapter, we describe the tools astronomers use to extend their vision into space. we have learned almost everything we know about the universe from studying electromagnetic radiation, as discussed in the chapter on radiation and spectra. in the twentieth century, our exploration of space made it possible to detect electromagnetic radiation at all wavelengths, from gamma rays to radio waves.
the different wavelengths carry different kinds of information, and the appearance of any given object often depends on the wavelength at which the observations are made. astronomical instruments 6 [image: astronomy_openstax_page199_img1.jpeg] 6.1 telescopes learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: systems for measuring radiation there are three basic components of a modern system for measuring radiation from astronomical sources. first, there is a telescope, which serves as a “bucket” for collecting visible light (or radiation at other wavelengths, as shown in (figure 6.2). just as you can catch more rain with a garbage can than with a coffee cup, large telescopes gather much more light than your eye can. second, there is an instrument attached to the telescope that sorts the incoming radiation by wavelength. sometimes the sorting is fairly crude. for example, we might simply want to separate blue light from red light so that we can determine the temperature of a star. but at other times, we want to see individual spectral lines to determine what an object is made of, or to measure its speed (as explained in the radiation and spectra chapter).