we have also been able to study a few martian rocks that reached earth as meteorites. mars has heavily cratered highlands in its southern hemisphere, but younger, lower volcanic plains over much of its northern half. the tharsis bulge, as big as north america, includes several huge volcanoes; olympus mons is more than 20 kilometers high and 500 kilometers in diameter. the valles marineris canyons are tectonic features widened by erosion. early landers revealed only barren, windswept plains, but later missions have visited places with more geological (and scenic) variety. landing sites have been selected in part to search for evidence of past water. 10.5 water and life on mars the martian atmosphere has a surface pressure of less than 0.01 bar and is 95% co2. it has dust clouds, water clouds, and carbon dioxide (dry ice) clouds. liquid water on the surface is not possible today, but there is subsurface permafrost at high latitudes. seasonal polar caps are made of dry ice; the northern residual cap is water ice, whereas the southern permanent ice cap is made predominantly of water ice with a covering of carbon dioxide ice.
evidence of a very different climate in the past is found in water erosion features: both runoff channels and outflow channels, the latter carved by catastrophic floods. our rovers, exploring ancient lakebeds and places where sedimentary rock has formed, have found evidence for extensive surface water in the past. even more exciting are the gullies that seem to show the presence of flowing salty water on the surface today, hinting at near-surface aquifers. the viking landers searched for martian life in 1976, with 10 • key terms 357 negative results, but life might have flourished long ago. we have found evidence of water on mars, but following the water has not yet led us to life on that planet. 10.6 divergent planetary evolution earth, venus, and mars have diverged in their evolution from what may have been similar beginnings. we need to understand why if we are to protect the environment of earth. for further exploration articles venus byrne, p. “venus: inevitability or catastrophe.” sky & telescope (october 2021): 12. on the evolution of the planet’s surface and atmosphere. carroll, m.
“revealing venus.” astronomy (may 2023): 22. nice overview of our present knowledge and planned missions. grinspoon, d. “sending astronauts to venus.” sky & telescope (november 2022): 11. short piece on what astronauts could accomplish from orbit. lakdawalla, e. “venus renaissance.” sky & telescope (may 2022): 12. what we know and what future missions could reveal. sheehan, w. “unveiling the clouds of venus.” astronomy (dec. 2021): 48. history of trying to understand the clouds of neighbor planet. zimmerman, r. “taking venus by storm.” astronomy (october 2008): 66. on results from the venus express mission. mars barbuzano, j. “the mystery of the martian moons.” sky & telescope (april 2021): 34. different ideas on how mars acquired two small moons. bell, j. “flying with ingenuity on mars.” sky & telescope (august 2022): 12. nice intro to the helicopter and what it has been able to do. bell, j.
“is there life on mars.” astronomy (september 2019): 24. what previous missions have told us and what we would like to know. bell, j. “martian weather report.” sky & telescope (december 2019): 22. authoritative review of martian seasons and what it’s like on the surface of mars. bell, j. “new mars rover begins its mission.” astronomy (february 2021): 24. on the perseverance rover and the ingenuity helicopter and what they hope to accomplish. bell, j. & sheehan, w. “50 years on mars.” astronomy (november 2021): 16. how mariner 9 and other early missions set the stage for current exploration. evans, b. “curiosity’s 10 years on mars.” astronomy (september 2022): 24. story of the rover mission, its images and discoveries. hall, s. “opportunity’s end.” sky & telescope (september 2019): 24. on what astronomers have learned from the opportunity rover on mars. lakdawalla, e.