scientists were therefore left with the sister hypothesis—that the moon formed alongside earth—or with some modification of the fission hypothesis that can find a more acceptable way for the lunar material to have separated from earth. but the more we learned about our moon, the less these old ideas seem to fit the bill. the giant impact hypothesis in an effort to resolve these apparent contradictions, scientists developed a fourth hypothesis for the origin of the moon, one that involves a giant impact early in earth’s history. there is increasing evidence that large chunks of material—objects of essentially planetary mass—were orbiting in the inner solar system at the time that the terrestrial planets formed. the giant impact hypothesis envisions earth being struck obliquely by an object approximately one-tenth earth’s mass—a “bullet” about the size of mars. this is very nearly the largest impact earth could experience without being shattered. such an impact would disrupt much of earth and eject a vast amount of material into space, releasing almost enough energy to break the planet apart. computer simulations indicate that material totaling several percent of earth’s mass could be ejected in such an impact. most of this material would be from the stony mantles of earth and the impacting body, not from their metal cores.
this ejected rock vapor then cooled and formed a describe the top three early hypotheses of the formation of the moon summarize the current “giant impact” concept of how the moon formed 2 remember from the radiation and spectra chapter that the term isotope means a different “version” of an element. specifically, different isotopes of the same element have equal numbers of protons but different numbers of neutrons (as in carbon-12 versus carbon-14.) 306 9 • cratered worlds access for free at openstax.org ring of material orbiting earth. it was this ring that ultimately condensed into the moon. while we do not have any current way of showing that the giant impact hypothesis is the correct model of the moon’s origin, it does offer potential solutions to most of the major problems raised by the chemistry of the moon. first, since the moon’s raw material is derived from the mantles of earth and the projectile, the absence of metals is easily understood. second, most of the volatile elements would have been lost during the high- temperature phase following the impact, explaining the lack of these materials on the moon.
yet, by making the moon primarily of terrestrial mantle material, it is also possible to understand similarities such as identical abundances of various oxygen isotopes. 9.5 mercury learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: mercury’s orbit the planet mercury is similar to the moon in many ways. like the moon, it has no atmosphere, and its surface is heavily cratered. as described later in this chapter, it also shares with the moon the likelihood of a violent birth. mercury is the nearest planet to the sun, and, in accordance with kepler’s third law, it has the shortest period of revolution about the sun (88 of our days) and the highest average orbital speed (48 kilometers per second). it is appropriately named for the fleet-footed messenger god of the romans. because mercury remains close to the sun, it can be difficult to pick out in the sky. as you might expect, it’s best seen when its eccentric orbit takes it as far from the sun as possible. the semimajor axis of mercury’s orbit—that is, the planet’s average distance from the sun—is 58 million kilometers, or 0.39 au.
however, because its orbit has the high eccentricity of 0.206, mercury’s actual distance from the sun varies from 46 million kilometers at perihelion to 70 million kilometers at aphelion (the ideas and terms that describe orbits were introduced in orbits and gravity). composition and structure mercury’s mass is one-eighteenth that of earth, making it the smallest terrestrial planet. mercury is the smallest planet (except for the dwarf planets), having a diameter of 4878 kilometers, less than half that of earth. mercury’s density is 5.4 g/cm3, much greater than the density of the moon, indicating that the composition of those two objects differs substantially. mercury’s composition is one of the most interesting things about it and makes it unique among the planets. mercury’s high density tells us that it must be composed largely of heavier materials such as metals. the most likely models for mercury’s interior suggest a metallic iron-nickel core amounting to 60% of the total mass, with the rest of the planet made up primarily of silicates. the core has a diameter of 3500 kilometers and extends out to within 700 kilometers of the surface.