theoretical calculations suggest some of the most likely events that would give a burst of gravitational waves strong enough that our equipment on earth describe what a gravitational wave is, what can produce it, and how fast it propagates understand the basic mechanisms used to detect gravitational waves 850 24 • black holes and curved spacetime access for free at openstax.org could measure it: • the coalescence of two neutron stars in a binary system that spiral together until they merge • the swallowing of a neutron star by a black hole • the coalescence (merger) of two black holes • the implosion of a really massive star to form a neutron star or a black hole • the first “shudder” when space and time came into existence and the universe began for the last four decades, scientists have been developing an audacious experiment to try to detect gravitational waves from a source on this list. the us experiment, which was built with collaborators from the uk, germany, australia and other countries, is named ligo (laser interferometer gravitational-wave observatory). ligo currently has two observing stations, one in louisiana and the other in the state of washington.
the effects of gravitational waves are so small that confirmation of their detection will require simultaneous measurements by two widely separated facilities. local events that might cause small motions within the observing stations and mimic gravitational waves—such as small earthquakes, ocean tides, and even traffic—should affect the two sites differently. each of the ligo stations consists of two 4-kilometer-long, 1.2-meter-diameter vacuum pipes arranged in an l- shape. a test mass with a mirror on it is suspended by wire at each of the four ends of the pipes. ultra-stable laser light is reflected from the mirrors and travels back and forth along the vacuum pipes (figure 24.17). if gravitational waves pass through the ligo instrument, then, according to einstein’s theory, the waves will affect local spacetime—they will alternately stretch and shrink the distance the laser light must travel between the mirrors ever so slightly. when one arm of the instrument gets longer, the other will get shorter, and vice versa. figure 24.17 gravitational wave telescope. an aerial view of the ligo facility at livingston, louisiana. extending to the upper left and far right of the image are the 4-kilometer-long detectors.
(credit: modification of work by caltech/mit/ligo laboratory) the challenge of this experiment lies in that phrase “ever so slightly.” in fact, to detect a gravitational wave, the change in the distance to the mirror must be measured with an accuracy of one ten-thousandth the diameter of a proton. in 1972, rainer weiss of mit wrote a paper suggesting how this seemingly impossible task might be accomplished. a great deal of new technology had to be developed, and work on the laboratory, with funding from the national science foundation, began in 1979. a full-scale prototype to demonstrate the technology was built and operated from 2002 to 2010, but the prototype was not expected to have the sensitivity required to actually detect gravitational waves from an astronomical source. advanced ligo, built to be more precise with the improved technology developed in the prototype, went into operation in 2015—and almost immediately 24.7 • gravitational wave astronomy 851 [image: astronomy_openstax_page869_img1.jpeg] detected gravitational waves. what ligo found was gravitational waves produced in the final fraction of a second of the merger of two black holes (figure 24.18).
the black holes had masses of 20 and 36 times the mass of the sun, and the merger took place 1.3 billion years ago—the gravitational waves occurred so far away that it has taken that long for them, traveling at the speed of light, to reach us. in the cataclysm of the merger, about three times the mass of the sun was converted to energy (recall e = mc2). during the tiny fraction of a second for the merger to take place, this event produced power about 10 times the power produced by all the stars in the entire visible universe—but the power was all in the form of gravitational waves and hence was invisible to our instruments, except to ligo. the event was recorded in louisiana about 7 milliseconds before the detection in washington—just the right distance given the speed at which gravitational waves travel—and indicates that the source was located somewhere in the southern hemisphere sky. unfortunately, the merger of two black holes is not expected to produce any light, so this is the only observation we have of the event. figure 24.18 signal produced by a gravitational wave. (a) the top panel shows the signal measured at hanford, washington; the middle panel shows the signal measured at livingston, louisiana.