these are discussed in component 139 and component 140 [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page309_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 310 novae are fainter than supernovae figure 358: accretion disk drawing by noaa novae can recur figure 360: accretion disk drawing by noaa figure 359: nova delphinus 2013 data from aavso component 139 – novae if a white dwarf stellar remnant is part of a semi-detached binary system, and its companion becomes a red giant star that has expanded past its roche limit, that red giant star will contribute material to an accretion disk. a nova will experience a sharp increase in brightness and then it will dim gradually. it is a thousand times dimmer than a supernova. novae are caused by the material from the companion star falling onto the surface of the white dwarf stellar remnant. this hydrogen suddenly fuses and results in the outburst. novae can happen repeatedly on the same white dwarf. there are four classifications of novae: • na: fast novae: a rapid brightness increase, followed by a decline of 3 magnitudes in the next 100 days.
• nb: slow novae: a decline of 3 magnitudes in 150 days or more • nc: very slow novae: staying at maximum brightness for a decade or more and then fading very slowly. • nr: recurrent novae: novae with multiple brightness outbursts separated by 10–80 years. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page310_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page310_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 311 figure 361: supernova 2014-j data from aavso type ia supernovae are standard candles for measuring distance component 140 – carbon detonation supernovae but what happened if the infalling matter pushes the mass of the white dwarf stellar remnant beyond 1.4 solar masses, the chandrasekhar limit? when this happens there is a massive detonation of the carbon of the white dwarf stellar remnant. all of the carbon begins to fuse at once, so there is a massive supernova explosion. this is a type i supernova and is called a carbon detonation supernova.
this is different from the core collapse supernova of large mass stars, which is a type ii supernova. an alternative mechanism to cause the same outcome could be the merging of two white dwarf stellar remnants. these supernovae show very little hydrogen in their spectra because the amount of hydrogen available is a much smaller proportion than in type ii supernovae. the remnant of a type i supernova explosion is nothing. it is believed that these stars blow themselves apart. figure 361 is a chart from the american associate of variable star observers for supernovae 2014-j. much of this data was supplied by the insperity observatory in humble, tx. type ia supernovae are standard candles used to measure the distance to galaxies. the absolute magnitude for a type ia supernova is -19.3 due to the mass of the remnant being the chandrasekhar limit of 1.4 solar masses.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page311_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 312 figure 363: a gravity wave detector drawing by malyszkz supernovae and binary systems likely radiate gravity waves figure 362: gravity wave detector component 141 – gravitational waves just as electromagnetic radiation moves outward through space in waves with photons as the quantum particle used to carry the electromagnetic force, it is reasonable to assume that the gravitational force radiates outward through space in gravitational waves with gravitons as the quantum particle use to carry the gravitational force. expanding on einstein’s general theory of relativity in 1934, blokhintsev and gal'perin developed a theory that predicts that gravitons should exist. although it is not practical for us to detect individual gravitons it is possible to detect gravitational waves. ligo and virgo experiments have detected these waves and could yield information on specific characteristics of gravitons.