the palomar telescope is a massive steel structure designed to hold the 14.5-ton primary mirror with a 5-meter diameter. glass tends to sag under its own weight; hence, a huge steel structure is needed to hold the mirror. a mirror 8 meters in diameter, the size of the gemini north telescope, if it were built using the same technology as the palomar telescope, would have to weigh at least eight times as much and would require an enormous steel structure to support it. 190 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org figure 6.8 modern reflecting telescopes. (a) the palomar 5-meter reflector: the hale telescope on palomar mountain has a complex mounting structure that enables the telescope (in the open “tube” pointing upward in this photo) to swing easily into any position. (b) the gemini north 8-meter telescope: the gemini north mirror has a larger area than the palomar mirror, but note how much less massive the whole instrument seems.
(credit a: modification of work by caltech/palomar observatory; credit b: modification of work by gemini observatory/aura) the 8-meter gemini north telescope looks like a featherweight by contrast, and indeed it is. the mirror is only about 8 inches thick and weighs 24.5 tons, less than twice as much as the palomar mirror. the gemini north telescope was completed about 50 years after the palomar telescope. engineers took advantage of new technologies to build a telescope that is much lighter in weight relative to the size of the primary mirror. the gemini mirror does sag, but with modern computers, it is possible to measure that sag many times each second and apply forces at 120 different locations to the back of the mirror to correct the sag, a process called active control. seventeen telescopes with mirrors 6.5 meters in diameter and larger have been constructed since 1990. the twin 10-meter keck telescopes on maunakea, which were the first of these new-technology instruments, use precision control in an entirely novel way.
instead of a single primary mirror 10 meters in diameter, each keck telescope achieves its larger aperture by combining the light from 36 separate hexagonal mirrors, each 1.8 meters wide (figure 6.9). computer-controlled actuators (motors) constantly adjust these 36 mirrors so that the overall reflecting surface acts like a single mirror with just the right shape to collect and focus the light into a sharp image. 6.2 • telescopes today 191 [image: astronomy_openstax_page209_img1.jpeg] figure 6.9 thirty-six eyes are better than one. the mirror of the 10-meter keck telescope is composed of 36 hexagonal sections. (credit: nasa) learn more about the keck observatory on maunakea (https://openstax.org/l/30keckobserv) through this history channel clip on the telescopes and the work that they do. in addition to holding the mirror, the steel structure of a telescope is designed so that the entire telescope can be pointed quickly toward any object in the sky.
since earth is rotating, the telescope must have a motorized drive system that moves it very smoothly from east to west at exactly the same rate that earth is rotating from west to east, so it can continue to point at the object being observed. all this machinery must be housed in a dome to protect the telescope from the elements. the dome has an opening in it that can be positioned in front of the telescope and moved along with it, so that the light from the objects being observed is not blocked. george ellery hale: master telescope builder george ellery hale (figure 6.10) was a giant among early telescope builders. not once, but four times, he initiated projects that led to the construction of what was the world’s largest telescope at the time. and he was a master at winning over wealthy benefactors to underwrite the construction of these new instruments. link to learning voyagers in astronomy 192 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page210_img1.jpeg] figure 6.10 george ellery hale (1868–1938).