but as the survey becomes more complete, more and more of the moving points the survey cameras record will be rediscoveries. the more rediscoveries each survey experiences, the more complete our inventory of these asteroids must be. we have been relieved to find that none of the neas discovered so far is on a trajectory that will impact earth within the foreseeable future. however, we can’t speak for the handful of asteroids larger than 1 kilometer that have not yet been found, or for the much more numerous smaller ones. it is estimated that there are a million neas capable of hitting earth that are smaller than 1 kilometer but still large enough to destroy a city, and our surveys have found about 25% of them. researchers who work with asteroid orbits estimate that for smaller (and therefore fainter) asteroids we are not yet tracking, we will have about a 5-second warning that one is going to hit earth—in other words, we won’t see it until it enters the atmosphere. clearly, this estimate gives us a lot of motivation to continue these surveys to track as many asteroids as possible.
though entirely predictable over times of a few centuries, the orbits of earth-approaching asteroids are unstable over long time spans as they are tugged by the gravitational attractions of the planets. these objects will eventually meet one of two fates: either they will impact one of the terrestrial planets or the sun, or they will be ejected gravitationally from the inner solar system due to a near-encounter with a planet. the probabilities of these two outcomes are about the same. the timescale for impact or ejection is only about a hundred million years, very short compared with the 4-billion-year age of the solar system. calculations show that only approximately one quarter of the current earth-approaching asteroids will eventually end up colliding with earth itself. if most of the current population of earth-approaching asteroids will be removed by impact or ejection in a 448 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page466_img1.jpeg] hundred million years, there must be a continuing source of new objects to replenish our supply of neas.
most of them come from the asteroid belt between mars and jupiter, where collisions between asteroids can eject fragments into earth-crossing orbits (see figure 13.15). others may be “dead” comets that have exhausted their volatile materials (which we’ll discuss in the next section). figure 13.15 near-earth asteroid. toutatis is a 5-kilometer long nea that approached within 3 million kilometers of earth in 1992. this series of images is a reconstruction its size and shape obtained from bouncing radar waves off the asteroid during its close flyby. toutatis appears to consist of two irregular, lumpy bodies rotating in contact with each other. (note that the color has been artificially added.) (credit: modification of work by nasa) one reason scientists are interested in the composition and interior structure of neas is that humans will probably need to defend themselves against an asteroid impact someday. if we ever found one of these asteroids on a collision course with us, we would need to deflect it so it would miss earth. the most straightforward way to deflect it would be to crash a spacecraft into it, either slowing it or speeding it up, slightly changing its orbital period.
if this were done several years before the predicted collision, the asteroid would miss the planet entirely—making an asteroid impact the only natural hazard that we could eliminate completely by the application of technology. alternatively, such deflection could be done by exploding a nuclear bomb near the asteroid to nudge it off course, although the use of nuclear explosives in space raises other concerns. to achieve a successful deflection by either technique, we need to know more about the density and interior structure of the asteroid. a spacecraft impact or a nearby explosion would have a greater effect on a solid rocky asteroid such as eros than on a loose rubble pile. think of climbing a sand dune compared to climbing a rocky hill with the same slope. on the dune, much of our energy is absorbed in the slipping sand, so the climb is much more difficult and takes more energy. the nasa planetary protection office has sponsored a first space mission to test asteroid deflection technology. the dart (double asteroid redirection test) was launched in november 2021, and eleven months later, the half-ton spacecraft collided with dimorphos, the moon of asteroid didymos. dimorphos is roughly the size of one of the great egyptian pyramids.