our study of mars reveals a planet with a fascinating history—one that saw its ability to host surface life dwindle billions of years ago, but perhaps allowing life to adapt and survive in favorable environmental niches. even if life did not survive, we expect that we might find evidence of life if it ever took hold on mars. if it is there, it is hidden in the crust, and we are still learning how best to decipher that evidence. life in the outer solar system the massive gas and ice giant planets of the outer solar system—jupiter, saturn, uranus, and neptune—are almost certainly not habitable for life as we know it, but some of their moons might be (see figure 30.12). although these worlds in the outer solar system contain abundant water, they receive so little warming sunlight in their distant orbits that it was long believed they would be “geologically dead” balls of hard-frozen ice and rock. but, as we saw in the chapter on rings, moons, and pluto, missions to the outer solar system 1068 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1086_img1.jpeg] have found something much more interesting.
jupiter’s moon europa revealed itself to the voyager and galileo missions as an active world whose icy surface apparently conceals an ocean with a depth of tens to perhaps a hundred kilometers. as the moon orbits jupiter, the planet’s massive gravity creates tides on europa—just as our own moon’s gravity creates our ocean tides—and the friction of all that pushing and pulling generates enough heat to keep the water in liquid form (figure 30.13). similar tides act upon other moons if they orbit close to the planet. scientists now think that six or more of the outer solar system’s icy moons may harbor liquid water oceans for the same reason. among these, europa and enceladus, a moon of saturn, have thus far been of greatest interest to astrobiologists. figure 30.12 jupiter’s moons. the galilean moons of jupiter are shown to relative scale and arranged in order of their orbital distance from jupiter. at far left, io orbits closest to jupiter and so experiences the strongest tidal heating by jupiter’s massive gravity. this effect is so strong that io is thought to be the most volcanically active body in our solar system.
at far right, callisto shows a surface scarred by billions of years’ worth of craters—an indication that the moon’s surface is old and that callisto may be far less active than its sibling moons. between these hot and cold extremes, europa, second from left, orbits at a distance where jupiter’s tidal heating may be “just right” to sustain a liquid water ocean beneath its icy crust. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl/dlr) europa has probably had an ocean for most or all of its history, but habitability requires more than just liquid water. life also requires energy, and because sunlight does not penetrate below the kilometers-thick ice crust of europa, this would have to be chemical energy. one of europa’s key attributes from an astrobiology perspective is that its ocean is most likely in direct contact with an underlying rocky mantle, and the interaction of water and rocks—especially at high temperatures, as within earth’s hydrothermal vent systems—yields a reducing chemistry (where molecules tend to give up electrons readily) that is like one half of a chemical battery.
to complete the battery and provide energy that could be used by life requires that an oxidizing chemistry (where molecules tend to accept electrons readily) also be available. on earth, when chemically reducing vent fluids meet oxygen-containing seawater, the energy that becomes available often supports thriving communities of microorganisms and animals on the sea floor, far from the light of the sun. the galileo mission found that europa’s icy surface does contain an abundance of oxidizing chemicals. this means that availability of energy to support life depends very much on whether the chemistry of the surface and the ocean can mix, despite the kilometers of ice in between. that europa’s ice crust appears geologically “young” (only tens of millions of years old, on average) and that it is active makes it tantalizing to think that such mixing might indeed occur. understanding whether and how much exchange occurs between the surface and ocean of europa will be a key science objective of future missions to europa, and a major step forward in understanding whether this moon could be a cradle of life.