your answer should be several powers of 10 smaller than the critical density. in other words, you have found for yourself that the contribution of the cmb photons to the overall density of the universe is much, much smaller than the contribution made by stars and galaxies. 29. there is still some uncertainty in the hubble constant. (a) current estimates range from about 19.9 km/s per million light-years to 23 km/s per million light-years. assume that the hubble constant has been constant since the big bang. what is the possible range in the ages of the universe? use the equation in the text, and make sure you use consistent units. (b) twenty years ago, estimates for the hubble constant ranged from 50 to 100 km/s per mpc (which is 15–30 km/s per million light-years). what are the possible ages for the universe from those values? can you rule out some of these possibilities on the basis of other evidence? 30. it is possible to derive the age of the universe given the value of the hubble constant and the distance to a galaxy, again with the assumption that the value of the hubble constant has not changed since the big bang.
consider a galaxy at a distance of 400 million light-years receding from us at a velocity, v. if the hubble constant is 20 km/s per million light-years, what is its velocity? how long ago was that galaxy right next door to our own galaxy if it has always been receding at its present rate? express your answer in years. since the universe began when all galaxies were very close together, this number is a rough estimate for the age of the universe. 1054 29 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 30.1 astrobiology: the road to life in the universe. in this fanciful montage produced by a nasa artist, we see one roadmap for discovering life in the universe. learning more about the origin, evolution, and properties of life on earth aids us in searching for evidence of life beyond our planet. our neighbor world, mars, had warmer, wetter conditions billions of years ago that might have helped life there begin. farther out, jupiter’s moon europa represents the icy moons of the outer solar system. beneath their shells of solid ice may lie vast oceans of liquid water that could support biology.
beyond our solar system are stars that host their own planets, some of which might be similar to earth in the ability to support liquid water—and a thriving biosphere—at the planet’s surface. research is pushing actively in all these directions with the goal of proving a scientific answer to the question, “are we alone?” (credit: modification of work by nasa) chapter outline 30.1 the cosmic context for life 30.2 astrobiology 30.3 searching for life beyond earth 30.4 the search for extraterrestrial intelligence thinking ahead as we have learned more about the universe, we have naturally wondered whether there might be other forms of life out there. the ancient question, “are we alone in the universe?” connects us to generations of humans before us. while in the past, this question was in the realm of philosophy or science fiction, today we have the means to seek an answer through scientific inquiry. in this chapter, we will consider how life began on earth, whether the same processes could have led to life on other worlds, and how we might seek evidence of life elsewhere. this is the science of astrobiology.
the search for life on other planets is not the same as the search for intelligent life, which (if it exists) is surely much rarer. learning more about the origin, evolution, and properties of life on earth aids us in searching for evidence of all kinds of life beyond that on our planet. life in the universe 30 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1073_img1.jpeg] 30.1 the cosmic context for life learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: we saw that the universe was born in the big bang about 14 billion years ago. after the initial hot, dense fireball of creation cooled sufficiently for atoms to exist, all matter consisted of hydrogen and helium (with a very small amount of lithium). as the universe aged, processes within stars created the other elements, including those that make up earth (such as iron, silicon, magnesium, and oxygen) and those required for life as we know it, such as carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen. these and other elements combined in space to produce a wide variety of compounds that form the basis of life on earth. in particular, life on earth is based on the presence of a key unit known as an organic molecule, a molecule that contains carbon.