a particular emission line of hydrogen is originally emitted with a wavelength of 656.3 nm from a gas cloud. at our telescope, we observe the wavelength of the emission line to be 656.6 nm. how fast is this gas cloud moving toward or away from earth? solution because the light is shifted to a longer wavelength (redshifted), we know this gas cloud is moving away from us. the speed can be calculated using the doppler shift formula: check your learning suppose a spectral line of hydrogen, normally at 500 nm, is observed in the spectrum of a star to be at 500.1 nm. how fast is the star moving toward or away from earth? answer: because the light is shifted to a longer wavelength, the star is moving away from us: its speed is 60,000 m/s. you may now be asking: if all the stars are moving and motion changes the wavelength of each spectral line, won’t this be a disaster for astronomers trying to figure out what elements are present in the stars? after all, it is the precise wavelength (or color) that tells astronomers which lines belong to which element. and we first measure these wavelengths in containers of gas in our laboratories, which are not moving.
if every line in a star’s spectrum is now shifted by its motion to a different wavelength (color), how can we be sure which lines and which elements we are looking at in a star whose speed we do not know? take heart. this situation sounds worse than it really is. astronomers rarely judge the presence of an element in an astronomical object by a single line. it is the pattern of lines unique to hydrogen or calcium that enables us to determine that those elements are part of the star or galaxy we are observing. the doppler effect does not change the pattern of lines from a given element—it only shifts the whole pattern slightly toward redder or bluer wavelengths. the shifted pattern is still quite easy to recognize. best of all, when we do recognize a familiar element’s pattern, we get a bonus: the amount the pattern is shifted can enable us to determine the speed of the objects in our line of sight. the training of astronomers includes much work on learning to decode light (and other electromagnetic radiation). a skillful “decoder” can learn the temperature of a star, what elements are in it, and even its speed in 172 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org a direction toward us or away from us.
that’s really an impressive amount of information for stars that are light-years away.