to this escape velocity is added whatever speed the projectile already had with respect to earth or moon, typically 10 kilometers per second or more. at these speeds, the energy of impact produces a violent explosion that excavates a large volume of material in a symmetrical way. photographs of bomb and shell craters on earth confirm that explosion craters are always essentially circular. only following world war i did scientists recognize the similarity between impact craters and explosion craters, but, sadly, gilbert did not live to see his impact hypothesis widely accepted. the cratering process let’s consider how an impact at these high speeds produces a crater. when such a fast projectile strikes a planet, it penetrates two or three times its own diameter before stopping. during these few seconds, its energy of motion is transferred into a shock wave (which spreads through the target body) and into heat (which vaporizes most of the projectile and some of the surrounding target). the shock wave fractures the rock of the target, while the expanding silicate vapor generates an explosion similar to that of a nuclear bomb detonated at ground level (figure 9.14).
the size of the excavated crater depends primarily on the speed of impact, but generally it is 10 to 15 times the diameter of the projectile. 9.3 • impact craters 301 [image: astronomy_openstax_page319_img1.jpeg] figure 9.14 stages in the formation of an impact crater. (a) the impact occurs. (b) the projectile vaporizes and a shock wave spreads through the lunar rock. (c) ejecta are thrown out of the crater. (d) most of the ejected material falls back to fill the crater, but some of it is found outside the crater in the form of an ejecta blanket. an impact explosion of the sort described above leads to a characteristic kind of crater, as shown in figure 9.15. the central cavity is initially bowl-shaped (the word “crater” comes from the greek word for “bowl”), but the rebound of the crust partially fills it in, producing a flat floor and sometimes creating a central peak. around the rim, landslides create a series of terraces. figure 9.15 typical impact crater.
king crater on the far side of the moon, a fairly recent lunar crater 75 kilometers in diameter, shows most of the features associated with large impact structures. (credit: nasa/jsc/arizona state university) the rim of the crater is turned up by the force of the explosion, so it rises above both the floor and the adjacent terrain. surrounding the rim is an ejecta blanket consisting of material thrown out by the explosion. this debris falls back to create a rough, hilly region, typically about as wide as the crater diameter. additional, higher-speed ejecta fall at greater distances from the crater, often digging small secondary craters where they strike the surface (figure 9.9). some of these streams of ejecta can extend for hundreds or even thousands of kilometers from the crater, creating the bright crater rays that are prominent in lunar photos taken near full phase. the brightest lunar crater rays are associated with large young craters such as kepler and tycho. observing the moon the moon is one of the most beautiful sights in the sky, and it is the only object close enough to reveal its topography (surface features such as mountains and valleys) without a visit from a spacecraft.
a fairly small amateur telescope easily shows craters and mountains on the moon as small as a few kilometers across. seeing for yourself 302 9 • cratered worlds access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page320_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page320_img2.jpeg] even as seen through a good pair of binoculars, we can observe that the appearance of the moon’s surface changes dramatically with its phase. at full phase, it shows almost no topographic detail, and you must look closely to see more than a few craters. this is because sunlight illuminates the surface straight on, and in this flat lighting, no shadows are cast. much more revealing is the view near first or third quarter, when sunlight streams in from the side, causing topographic features to cast sharp shadows. it is almost always more rewarding to study a planetary surface under such oblique lighting, when the maximum information about surface relief can be obtained. the flat lighting at full phase does, however, accentuate brightness contrasts on the moon, such as those between the maria and highlands.