the stellar neighbors nearest the sun are three stars in the constellation of centaurus. to the unaided eye, the brightest of these three stars is alpha centauri, which is only 30○from the south celestial pole and hence not visible from the mainland united states. alpha centauri itself is a binary star—two stars in mutual revolution—too close together to be distinguished without a telescope. these two stars are 4.4 light-years from us. nearby is a third faint star, known as proxima centauri. proxima, with a distance of 4.25 light-years, is slightly closer to us than the other two stars. if proxima centauri is part of a triple star system with the binary alpha centauri, as seems likely, then its orbital period may be longer than 500,000 years. proxima centauri is an example of the most common type of star, and our most common type of stellar neighbor (as we saw in stars: a celestial census.) low-mass red m dwarfs make up about 70% of all stars and dominate the census of stars within 10 parsecs (33 light-years) of the sun.
for example, a recent survey of the solar neighborhood counted 357 stars and brown dwarfs within 10 parsecs, and 248 of these are red dwarfs. yet, if you wanted to see an m dwarf with your naked eye, you would be out of luck. these stars only produce a fraction of the sun’s light, and nearly all of them require a telescope to be detected. the nearest star visible without a telescope from most of the united states is the brightest appearing of all the stars, sirius, which has a distance of a little more than 8 light-years. it too is a binary system, composed of a faint white dwarf orbiting a bluish-white, main-sequence star. it is an interesting coincidence of numbers that light reaches us from the sun in about 8 minutes and from the next brightest star in the sky in about 8 years. e x a m p l e 1 9 . 2 calculating the diameter of the sun for nearby stars, we can measure the apparent shift in their positions as earth orbits the sun. we wrote earlier that an object must be 206,265 au distant to have a parallax of one second of arc.
this must seem like a very strange number, but you can figure out why this is the right value. we will start by estimating the diameter of the sun and then apply the same idea to a star with a parallax of 1 arcsecond. make a sketch that has a round circle to represent the sun, place earth some distance away, and put an observer on it. draw two lines from the point where the observer is standing, one to each side of the sun. sketch a circle centered at earth with its circumference passing through the center of the sun. now think about proportions. the sun spans about half a degree on the sky. a full circle has 360○. the circumference of the 19.2 • surveying the stars 647 circle centered on earth and passing through the sun is given by: then, the following two ratios are equal: calculate the diameter of the sun. how does your answer compare to the actual diameter? solution to solve for the diameter of the sun, we can evaluate the expression above. this is very close to the true value of about 848,000 miles. check your learning now apply this idea to calculating the distance to a star that has a parallax of 1 arcsec.
draw a picture similar to the one we suggested above and calculate the distance in au. (hint: remember that the parallax angle is defined by 1 au, not 2 au, and that 3600 arcseconds = 1 degree.) answer: 206,265 au measuring parallaxes in space the measurements of stellar parallax were revolutionized by the launch of the spacecraft hipparcos in 1989, which measured distances for thousands of stars out to about 300 light-years with an accuracy of 10 to 20% (see figure 19.8 and the feature on parallax and space astronomy). however, even 300 light-years are less than 1% the size of our galaxy’s main disk. in december 2013, the successor to hipparcos, named gaia, was launched by the european space agency. gaia is measuring the position and distances to almost one billion stars with an accuracy of a few millionths of an arcsecond. gaia’s distance limit extends well beyond hipparcos, studying stars out to 30,000 light-years (100 times farther than hipparcos, covering nearly 1/3 of the galactic disk).