(on the european space agency website, they put this cost in context by saying, “the figure is barely half the price of a modern submarine, or three airbus 380 jumbo jets, and covers a period of almost 20 years, from the start of the project in 1996 through the end of the mission in 2015.”) g. if an earth-approaching asteroid were discovered early enough, humanity could take measures to prevent a collision. discuss possible methods for deflecting or even destroying an asteroid or comet. go beyond the few methods mentioned in the text and use your creativity. give pros and cons for each method. exercises review questions 1. why are asteroids and comets important to our understanding of solar system history? 2. give a brief description of the asteroid belt. 3. describe the main differences between c-type and s-type asteroids. 4. in addition to the ones mentioned in exercise 13.3, what is the third, rarer class of asteroids? 5. vesta is unusual as it contains what mineral on its surface? what does the presence of this material indicate? 6. compare asteroids of the asteroid belt with earth-approaching asteroids.
what is the main difference 472 13 • collaborative group activities access for free at openstax.org between the two groups? 7. briefly describe nasa’s spaceguard survey. how many objects have been found in this survey? 8. who first calculated the orbits of comets based on historical records dating back to antiquity? 9. describe the nucleus of a typical comet and compare it with an asteroid of similar size. 10. describe the two types of comet tails and how each are formed. 11. what classification is given to objects such as pluto and eris, which are large enough to be round, and whose orbits lie beyond that of neptune? 12. describe the origin and eventual fate of the comets we see from earth. 13. what evidence do we have for the existence of the kuiper belt? what kind of objects are found there? 14. give brief descriptions of both the kuiper belt and the oort cloud. thought questions 15. give at least two reasons today’s astronomers are so interested in the discovery of additional earth- approaching asteroids. 16. suppose you were designing a spacecraft that would match course with an asteroid and follow along its orbit.
what sorts of instruments would you put on board to gather data, and what would you like to learn? 17. suppose you were designing a spacecraft that would match course with a comet and move with it for a while. what sorts of instruments would you put on board to gather data, and what would you like to learn? 18. suppose a comet were discovered approaching the sun, one whose orbit would cause it to collide with earth 20 months later, after perihelion passage. (this is approximately the situation described in the science-fiction novel lucifer’s hammer by larry niven and jerry pournelle.) what could we do? would there be any way to protect ourselves from a catastrophe? 19. we believe that chains of comet fragments like comet shoemaker-levy 9’s have collided not only with the jovian planets, but occasionally with their moons. what sort of features would you look for on the outer planet moons to find evidence of such collisions? (as an extra bonus, can you find any images of such features on a moon like callisto? you can use an online site of planetary images, such as the planetary photojournal, at photojournal.jpl.nasa.gov.) 20.
why have we found so many objects in the kuiper belt in the last two decades and not before then? 21. why is it hard to give exact diameters for even the larger objects in the kuiper belt? figuring for yourself 22. refer to example 13.1. how would the calculation change if a typical comet in the oort cloud is only 1 km in diameter? 23. refer to example 13.1. how would the calculation change if a typical comet in the oort cloud is larger—say, 50 km in diameter? 24. the calculation in example 13.1 refers to the known oort cloud, the source for most of the comets we see. if, as some astronomers suspect, there are 10 times this many cometary objects in the solar system, how does the total mass of cometary matter compare with the mass of jupiter? 25. if the oort cloud contains 1012 comets, and ten new comets are discovered coming close to the sun each year, what percentage of the comets have been “used up” since the beginning of the solar system? 13 • exercises 473 26.