searching online, have group members research examples of black holes in music, advertising, cartoons, and the movies, and then make a presentation to share the examples you found with the whole class. g. as mentioned in the gravity and time machines feature box in this chapter, the film interstellar has a lot of black hole science in its plot and scenery. that’s because astrophysicist kip thorne at caltech had a big hand in writing the initial treatment for the movie, and later producing it. get your group members together (be sure you have popcorn) for a viewing of the movie and then try to use your knowledge of black holes from this chapter to explain the plot. (note that the film also uses the concept of a wormhole, 858 24 • collaborative group activities access for free at openstax.org which we don’t discuss in this chapter. a wormhole is a theoretically possible way to use a large, spinning black hole to find a way to travel from one place in the universe to another without having to go through regular spacetime to get there.) h.
in this chapter, we compare the beginning of gravitational wave astronomy to the time when silent films were replaced by movies with sound, trying to show how gravitational waves give us a whole new way of understanding and appreciating the universe. have your group brainstorm, from your study of astronomy so far and other courses: what other discoveries in the history of science have done something similar—opened a whole new way to see nature and the rules by which the natural world operates? exercises review questions 1. how does the equivalence principle lead us to suspect that spacetime might be curved? 2. if general relativity offers the best description of what happens in the presence of gravity, why do physicists still make use of newton’s equations in describing gravitational forces on earth (when building a bridge, for example)? 3. einstein’s general theory of relativity made or allowed us to make predictions about the outcome of several experiments that had not yet been carried out at the time the theory was first published. describe three experiments that verified the predictions of the theory after einstein proposed it. 4. if a black hole itself emits no radiation, what evidence do astronomers and physicists today have that the theory of black holes is correct? 5.
what characteristics must a binary star have to be a good candidate for a black hole? why is each of these characteristics important? 6. a student becomes so excited by the whole idea of black holes that he decides to jump into one. it has a mass 10 times the mass of our sun. what is the trip like for him? what is it like for the rest of the class, watching from afar? 7. what is an event horizon? does our sun have an event horizon around it? 8. what is a gravitational wave and why was it so hard to detect? 9. what are some strong sources of gravitational waves that astronomers hope to detect in the future? 10. suppose the amount of mass in a black hole doubles. does the event horizon change? if so, how does it change? thought questions 11. imagine that you have built a large room around the people in figure 24.4 and that this room is falling at exactly the same rate as they are. galileo showed that if there is no air friction, light and heavy objects that are dropping due to gravity will fall at the same rate. suppose that this were not true and that instead heavy objects fall faster.
also suppose that the man in figure 24.4 is twice as massive as the woman. what would happen? would this violate the equivalence principle? 12. a monkey hanging from a tree branch sees a hunter aiming a rifle directly at him. the monkey then sees a flash and knows that the rifle has been fired. reacting quickly, the monkey lets go of the branch and drops so that the bullet can pass harmlessly over his head. does this act save the monkey’s life? why or why not? (hint: consider the similarities between this situation and that of exercise 24.11.) 13. why would we not expect to detect x-rays from a disk of matter about an ordinary star? 14. look elsewhere in this book for necessary data, and indicate what the final stage of evolution—white 24 • exercises 859 dwarf, neutron star, or black hole—will be for each of these kinds of stars. a. spectral type-o main-sequence star b. spectral type-b main-sequence star c. spectral type-a main-sequence star d. spectral type-g main-sequence star e. spectral type-m main-sequence star 15. which is likely to be more common in our galaxy: white dwarfs or black holes?