(the modern composer karlheinz stockhausen was inspired by gamow’s ideas to write a piece of music called ylem, in which the players actually move away from the stage as they perform, simulating the expansion of the universe.) gamow’s ideas were close to our modern view, except we now know that the early universe remained hot enough for fusion for only a short while. thus, only the three lightest elements—hydrogen, helium, and a small amount of lithium—were formed in appreciable abundances at the beginning. the heavier elements formed later in stars. since the 1940s, many astronomers and physicists have worked on a detailed theory of what happened in the early stages of the universe. the first few minutes let’s start with the first few minutes following the big bang. three basic ideas hold the key to tracing the changes that occurred during the time just after the universe began. the first, as we have already mentioned, is that the universe cools as it expands. figure 29.13 shows how the temperature changes with the passage of time. note that a huge span of time, from a tiny fraction of a second to billions of years, is summarized in this diagram.
in the first fraction of a second, the universe was unimaginably hot. by the time 0.01 second had elapsed, the temperature had dropped to 100 billion (1011) k. after about 3 minutes, it had fallen to about 1 billion (109) k, still some 70 times hotter than the interior of the sun. after a few hundred thousand years, the temperature was down to a mere 3000 k, and the universe has continued to cool since that time. 29.3 • the beginning of the universe 1023 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1041_img1.jpeg] figure 29.13 temperature of the universe. this graph shows how the temperature of the universe varies with time as predicted by the standard model of the big bang. note that both the temperature (vertical axis) and the time in seconds (horizontal axis) change over vast scales on this compressed diagram. all of these temperatures but the last are derived from theoretical calculations since (obviously) no one was there to measure them directly. as we shall see in the next section, however, we have actually detected the feeble glow of radiation emitted at a time when the universe was a few hundred thousand years old.
we can measure the characteristics of that radiation to learn what things were like long ago. indeed, the fact that we have found this ancient glow is one of the strongest arguments in favor of the big bang model. the second step in understanding the evolution of the universe is to realize that at very early times, it was so hot that it contained mostly radiation (and not the matter that we see today). the photons that filled the universe could collide and produce material particles; that is, under the conditions just after the big bang, energy could turn into matter (and matter could turn into energy). we can calculate how much mass is produced from a given amount of energy by using einstein’s formula (see the chapter on the sun: a nuclear powerhouse). the idea that energy could turn into matter in the universe at large is a new one for many students, since it is not part of our everyday experience. that’s because, when we compare the universe today to what it was like right after the big bang, we live in cold, hard times. the photons in the universe today typically have far-less energy than the amount required to make new matter.
in the discussion on the source of the sun’s energy in the sun: a nuclear powerhouse, we briefly mentioned that when subatomic particles of matter and antimatter collide, they turn into pure energy. but the reverse, energy turning into matter and antimatter, is equally possible. this process has been observed in particle accelerators around the world. if we have enough energy, under the right circumstances, new particles of matter (and antimatter) are indeed created —and the conditions were right during the first few minutes after the expansion of the universe began. our third key point is that the hotter the universe was, the more energetic were the photons available to make matter and antimatter (see figure 29.13). to take a specific example, at a temperature of 6 billion (6 × 109) k, the collision of two typical photons can create an electron and its antimatter counterpart, a positron. if the temperature exceeds 1014 k, much more massive protons and antiprotons can be created. the evolution of the early universe keeping these three ideas in mind, we can trace the evolution of the universe from the time it was about 0.01 second old and had a temperature of about 100 billion k.