this book was written with much of the same mystical speculation as his other works, as the title implies. he spent much of his time trying to determine that the orbital distances of the planets were in whole number ratios to each other, and that these ratios corresponded to musical notes, chords, and harmonies. this is classic pythagoreanism, as it was pythagoras himself who discovered the same thing for the mathematical ratios of the lengths of plucked [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page438_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 439 figure 481: kepler's magnetic model a b c d e f sun + + + + + + - - - - - - strings and their corresponding musical tones. but buried deep inside the harmonices mundi lies kepler’s third law: for any planet, the ratio of the square of its orbital period to the cube of its mean distance from the sun is a constant. in the diagram, the straight line relationship demonstrates how the ratio is the same for each planet. the formula a=p2/3 uses the modern notation for the distance, a, and the period, p.
(you can cube both sides to get: a3=p2 which is closer to how kepler stated it, and is sometimes called the cube-square law.) kepler’s third law is correct, but the reasoning behind it is totally mystical. again, it is tycho’s data that is the key ingredient, and kepler’s faith in the data was total. kepler’s last contribution (from a scientific point of view) was his recognition that elliptical motion could not arise in any kind of model that employed crystalline spheres. since all the planets orbited the sun in the copernican system, kepler assumed that the sun must exert a force of attraction on the planets. having read a work on magnets by an english natural philosopher, william gilbert (de magnete, published in1600), kepler decided that the sun exerted a magnetic force of attraction that caused the planets to move in ellipses. in this diagram, the sun’s surface is one magnetic pole while its center is the other magnetic pole.
each planet also has a set of magnetic poles, which are attracted to the sun’s surface at points b to c, and are magnetically repelled at points e to f (at points d and a the forces are equal and cancel each other). this accounts for the changes in speed, and the elliptical orbit, of the planet. johannes kepler died in 1630, just three years after publication of the rudolphine tables. due to the accuracy of tycho’s data, the tables were a major improvement over any others, so they were quickly adopted by astronomers throughout europe. and because kepler propounded the copernican cosmology throughout, the rudolphine tables was the single most influential factor in the gradual acceptance of heliocentrism in the 17th century ce. but that acceptance was gradual, and confined mainly to protestant northern europe. catholic southern europe still defended an unmoving earth, and the scholarly arm of the church, the jesuits, stolidly defended tycho’s geo- heliocentrism over all challengers. galileo and the church galileo galilei (1564-1642) is probably the best known of all the renaissance astronomers.
his contributions to observational astronomy and to the analysis of terrestrial physics were a turning point in the scientific revolution. but his fame rests largely on his astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 440 figure 482: sidereus nuncius public domain defense of copernicus in the face of religious objections, where his personal demise is usually cast as a scientific martyrdom. galileo was born in 1564 in pisa, italy, to a father who was well educated, a respected cloth merchant, and somewhat of an authority in musical theory. the father wanted his son to study medicine, but galileo early on got hooked by mathematics. by age 25, he had become head of the mathematics department at the university of pisa. but his father did not approve, since mathematicians were held in low regard, and the salary was quite low. one of galileo’s character faults manifested itself during this early part of his career: when arguing forcefully, his disdain for anyone who disagreed with him created enemies. his attitude seemed to be that everyone should acknowledge him as the “smartest guy in the room,” and if that didn’t happen, galileo was very good at belittling any holdouts.