d. which are thought to be very old? e. which have the hottest stars? 13. the dwarf galaxy in sagittarius is the one closest to the milky way, yet it was discovered only in 1994. can you think of a reason it was not discovered earlier? (hint: think about what else is in its constellation.) 14. suppose three stars lie in the disk of the galaxy at distances of 20,000 light-years, 25,000 light-years, and 30,000 light-years from the galactic center, and suppose that right now all three are lined up in such a way that it is possible to draw a straight line through them and on to the center of the galaxy. how will the relative positions of these three stars change with time? assume that their orbits are all circular and lie in the plane of the disk. 15. why does star formation occur primarily in the disk of the galaxy? 16. where in the galaxy would you expect to find type ii supernovae, which are the explosions of massive stars that go through their lives very quickly? where would you expect to find type i supernovae, which involve the explosions of white dwarfs? 17.
suppose that stars evolved without losing mass—that once matter was incorporated into a star, it remained there forever. how would the appearance of the galaxy be different from what it is now? would there be population i and population ii stars? what other differences would there be? 25 • exercises 895 figuring for yourself 18. assume that the sun orbits the center of the galaxy at a speed of 220 km/s and a distance of 26,000 light- years from the center. a. calculate the circumference of the sun’s orbit, assuming it to be approximately circular. (remember that the circumference of a circle is given by 2πr, where r is the radius of the circle. be sure to use consistent units. the conversion from light-years to km/s can be found in an online calculator or appendix, or you can calculate it for yourself: the speed of light is 300,000 km/s, and you can determine the number of seconds in a year.) b. calculate the sun’s period, the “galactic year.” again, be careful with the units. does it agree with the number we gave above? 19.
the sun orbits the center of the galaxy in 225 million years at a distance of 26,000 light-years. given that where a is the semimajor axis and p is the orbital period, what is the mass of the galaxy within the sun’s orbit? 20. suppose the sun orbited a little farther out, but the mass of the galaxy inside its orbit remained the same as we calculated in exercise 25.19. what would be its period at a distance of 30,000 light-years? 21. we have said that the galaxy rotates differentially; that is, stars in the inner parts complete a full 360° orbit around the center of the galaxy more rapidly than stars farther out. use kepler’s third law and the mass we derived in exercise 25.19 to calculate the period of a star that is only 5000 light-years from the center. now do the same calculation for a globular cluster at a distance of 50,000 light-years. suppose the sun, this star, and the globular cluster all fall on a straight line through the center of the galaxy. where will they be relative to each other after the sun completes one full journey around the center of the galaxy?
(assume that all the mass in the galaxy is concentrated at its center.) 22. if our solar system is 4.6 billion years old, how many galactic years has planet earth been around? 23. suppose the average mass of a star in the galaxy is one-third of a solar mass. use the value for the mass of the galaxy that we calculated in exercise 25.19, and estimate how many stars are in the milky way. give some reasons it is reasonable to assume that the mass of an average star is less than the mass of the sun. 24. the first clue that the galaxy contains a lot of dark matter was the observation that the orbital velocities of stars did not decreases with increasing distance from the center of the galaxy. construct a rotation curve for the solar system by using the orbital velocities of the planets, which can be found in appendix f. how does this curve differ from the rotation curve for the galaxy? what does it tell you about where most of the mass in the solar system is concentrated? 25. the best evidence for a black hole at the center of the galaxy also comes from the application of kepler’s third law.