magnetic field and magnetosphere we can find additional clues about earth’s interior from its magnetic field. our planet behaves in some ways as if a giant bar magnet were inside it, aligned approximately with the rotational poles of earth. this magnetic field is generated by moving material in earth’s liquid metallic core. as the liquid metal inside earth circulates, it sets up a circulating electric current. when many charged particles are moving together like that—in the laboratory or on the scale of an entire planet—they produce a magnetic field. earth’s magnetic field extends into surrounding space. when a charged particle encounters a magnetic field in space, it becomes trapped in the magnetic zone. above earth’s atmosphere, our field is able to trap small quantities of electrons and other atomic particles. this region, called the magnetosphere, is defined as the zone within which earth’s magnetic field dominates over the weak interplanetary magnetic field that extends outward from the sun (figure 8.5). figure 8.5 earth’s magnetosphere. a cross-sectional view of our magnetosphere (or zone of magnetic influence), as revealed by numerous spacecraft missions. note how the wind of charged particles from the sun “blows” the magnetic field outward like a wind sock.
where do the charged particles trapped in our magnetosphere come from? they flow outward from the hot surface of the sun; this is called the solar wind. it not only provides particles for earth’s magnetic field to trap, it also stretches our field in the direction pointing away from the sun. typically, earth’s magnetosphere extends about 60,000 kilometers, or 10 earth radii, in the direction of the sun. but, in the direction away from the sun, the magnetic field can reach as far as the orbit of the moon, and sometimes farther. 8.1 • the global perspective 259 [image: astronomy_openstax_page277_img1.jpeg] the magnetosphere was discovered in 1958 by instruments on the first us earth satellite, explorer 1, which recorded the ions (charged particles) trapped in its inner part. the regions of high-energy ions in the magnetosphere are often called the van allen belts in recognition of the university of iowa professor who built the scientific instrumentation for explorer 1. since 1958, hundreds of spacecraft have explored various regions of the magnetosphere. you can read more about its interaction with the sun in a later chapter.
8.2 earth’s crust learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: let us now examine our planet’s outer layers in more detail. earth’s crust is a dynamic place. volcanic eruptions, erosion, and large-scale movements of the continents rework the surface of our planet constantly. geologically, ours is the most active planet. many of the geological processes described in this section have taken place on other planets as well, but usually in their distant pasts. some of the moons of the giant planets also have impressive activity levels. for example, jupiter’s moon io has a remarkable number of active volcanoes. composition of the crust earth’s crust is largely made up of oceanic basalt and continental granite. these are both igneous rock, the term used for any rock that has cooled from a molten state. all volcanically produced rock is igneous (figure 8.6). figure 8.6 formation of igneous rock as liquid lava cools and freezes. this is a lava flow from a basaltic eruption. basaltic lava flows quickly and can move easily over distances of more than 20 kilometers.
(credit: usgs) two other kinds of rock are familiar to us on earth, although it turns out that neither is common on other planets. sedimentary rocks are made of fragments of igneous rock or the shells of living organisms deposited by wind or water and cemented together without melting. on earth, these rocks include the common sandstones, shales, and limestones. metamorphic rocks are produced when high temperature or pressure alters igneous or sedimentary rock physically or chemically (the word metamorphic means “changed in form”). metamorphic rocks are produced on earth because geological activity carries surface rocks down to considerable depths and then brings them back up to the surface. without such activity, these changed rocks would not exist at the surface.