this would be an unacceptable uncertainty if you were loading fuel into a spaceship for a trip to the star, but it is not a bad first figure to work with if you are an astronomer stuck on planet earth. nor is the construction of h–r diagrams as easy as you might think at first. to make a good diagram, one needs to measure the characteristics and distances of many stars, which can be a time-consuming task. since our own solar neighborhood is already well mapped, the stars astronomers most want to study to advance our knowledge are likely to be far away and faint. it may take hours of observing to obtain a single spectrum. observers may have to spend many nights at the telescope (and many days back home working with their data) before they get their distance measurement. fortunately, this is changing because surveys like gaia will study billions of stars, producing public datasets that all astronomers can use. despite these difficulties, the tools we have been discussing allow us to measure a remarkable range of distances—parallaxes for the nearest stars, rr lyrae variable stars; the h–r diagram for clusters of stars in our own and nearby galaxies; and cepheids out to distances of 60 million light-years.
table 19.1 describes the distance limits and overlap of each method. each technique described in this chapter builds on at least one other method, forming what many call the cosmic distance ladder. parallaxes are the foundation of all stellar distance estimates, spectroscopic methods use nearby stars to calibrate their h–r diagrams, and rr lyrae and cepheid distance estimates are grounded in h–r diagram distance estimates (and even in a parallax measurement to a nearby cepheid, delta cephei). this chain of methods allows astronomers to push the limits when looking for even more distant stars. recent work, for example, has used rr lyrae stars to identify dim companion galaxies to our own milky way out at distances of 300,000 light-years. the h–r diagram method was recently used to identify the two most distant stars in the galaxy: red giant stars way out in the halo of the milky way with distances of almost 1 million light- years. we can combine the distances we find for stars with measurements of their composition, luminosity, and temperature—made with the techniques described in analyzing starlight and the stars: a celestial census.
together, these make up the arsenal of information we need to trace the evolution of stars from birth to death, the subject to which we turn in the chapters that follow.
658 19 • celestial distances access for free at openstax.org distance range of celestial measurement methods method distance range trigonometric parallax 4–30,000 light-years when the gaia mission is complete rr lyrae stars out to 300,000 light-years h–r diagram and spectroscopic distances out to 1,200,000 light-years cepheid stars out to 60,000,000 light-years table 19.1 19.4 • the h–r diagram and cosmic distances 659 key terms cepheid a star that belongs to a class of yellow supergiant pulsating stars; these stars vary periodically in brightness, and the relationship between their periods and luminosities is useful in deriving distances to them light curve a graph that displays the time variation of the light from a variable or eclipsing binary star or, more generally, from any other object whose radiation output changes with time luminosity class a classification of a star according to its luminosity within a given spectral class; our sun, a g2v star, has luminosity class v, for example parallax an apparent displacement of a nearby star that results from the motion of earth around the sun parsec a unit of distance in astronomy, equal to 3.26 light-years; at a distance of 1 parsec, a star has a parallax of 1 arcsecond period-luminosity relation an empirical relation between the periods and luminosities of certain variable stars pulsating variable star a variable star that pulsates in size and luminosity rr lyrae one of a class of giant pulsating stars with periods shorter than 1 day, useful for finding distances summary 19.1 fundamental units of distance early measurements of length were based on human dimensions, but today, we use worldwide standards that specify lengths in units such as the meter.