this nebula was the result of the collapse of an interstellar cloud of gas and dust, which contracted (conserving its angular momentum) to form our star, the sun, surrounded by a thin, spinning disk of dust and vapor. condensation in the disk led to the formation of planetesimals, which became the building blocks of the planets. accretion of infalling materials heated the planets, leading to their differentiation. the giant planets were also able to attract and hold gas from the solar nebula. after a few million years of violent impacts, most of the debris was swept up or ejected, leaving only the asteroids and cometary remnants surviving to the present. 14.4 comparison with other planetary systems the first planet circling a distant solar-type star was announced in 1995. twenty years later, thousands of exoplanets have been identified, including planets with sizes and masses between earth’s and neptune’s, which we don’t have in our own solar system. a few percent of exoplanet systems have “hot jupiters,” massive planets that orbit close to their stars, and many exoplanets are also in eccentric orbits.
these two characteristics are fundamentally different from the attributes of gas giant planets in our own solar system and suggest that giant planets can migrate inward from their place of formation where it is cold enough for ice to form. current data indicate that small (terrestrial type) rocky planets are common in our galaxy; indeed, 502 14 • key terms access for free at openstax.org there must be tens of billions of such earthlike planets. 14.5 planetary evolution after their common beginning, each of the planets evolved on its own path. different possible outcomes are illustrated by comparison of the terrestrial planets (earth, venus, mars, mercury, and the moon). all are rocky, differentiated objects. the level of geological activity is proportional to mass: greatest for earth and venus, less for mars, and absent for the moon and mercury. however, tides from another nearby world can also generate heat to drive geological activity, as shown by io, europa, and enceladus. pluto is also active, to the surprise of planetary scientists. on the surfaces of solid worlds, mountains can result from impacts, volcanism, or uplift. whatever their origin, higher mountains can be supported on smaller planets that have less surface gravity.
the atmospheres of the terrestrial planets may have acquired volatile materials from comet impacts. the moon and mercury lost their atmospheres; most volatiles on mars are frozen due to its greater distance from the sun and its thinner atmosphere; and venus retained co2 but lost h2o when it developed a massive greenhouse effect. only earth still has liquid water on its surface and hence can support life. for further exploration note: resources about exoplanets exoplanets (planets that orbit other stars) can be found in the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system. articles meteors and meteorites alper, j. “it came from outer space.” astronomy (november 2002): 36. on the analysis of organic materials in meteorites. beatty, j. “catch a fallen star.” sky & telescope (august 2009): 22. on the recovery of meteorites from an impact that was seen in the sky. durda, d. “the chelyabinsk super-meteor.” sky & telescope (june 2013): 24. a nice summary, with photos and eyewitness reporting. garcia, r., & notkin, g.
“touching the stars without leaving home.” sky & telescope (october 2008): 32. hunting and collecting meteorites. kinsman, t. “micrometeorite hunter.” sky & telescope (february 2020): 14. on collecting and identifying magnetic micrometeorites. kring, d. “unlocking the solar system’s past.” astronomy (august 2006): 32. part of a special issue devoted to meteorites. loomis, i. “excavating cosmic fossils.” astronomy (august 2020): 28. on studying micrometeorites and what they can tell us. rao, j. “a new meteor shower.” sky & telescope (may 2022): 34. on the breakup of comet schwassmann- wachmann 3 and whether it will lead to a meteor shower. shubinski, r. “secrets of the meteorites.” astronomy (may 2022): 52. finding and analyzing rocks that fall from space. evolution of the solar system and protoplanetary disks ansdell, m. “revising the story of planetary formation.” sky & telescope (may 2020): 34.