in addition to the motions of earth and the moon, they were able to fit in the approximately 12-year cycle of jupiter, which was central to their system of astrology. the chinese still preserve some aspects of this system in their cycle of 12 “years”—the year of the dragon, the year of the pig, and so on—that are defined by the position of jupiter in the zodiac. our western calendar derives from a long history of timekeeping beginning with the sumerians, dating back to at least the second millennium bce, and continuing with the egyptians and the greeks around the eighth century bce. these calendars led, eventually, to the julian calendar, introduced by julius caesar, which approximated the year at 365.25 days, fairly close to the actual value of 365.2422. the romans achieved this approximation by declaring years to have 365 days each, with the exception of every fourth year. the leap year was to have one extra day, bringing its length to 366 days, and thus making the average length of the year in the julian calendar 365.25 days.
in this calendar, the romans had dropped the almost impossible task of trying to base their calendar on the moon as well as the sun, although a vestige of older lunar systems can be seen in the fact that our months have an average length of about 30 days. however, lunar calendars remained in use in other cultures, and islamic calendars, for example, are still primarily lunar rather than solar. the gregorian calendar although the julian calendar (which was adopted by the early christian church) represented a great advance, its average year still differed from the true year by about 11 minutes, an amount that accumulates over the centuries to an appreciable error. by 1582, that 11 minutes per year had added up to the point where the first day of spring was occurring on march 11, instead of march 21. if the trend were allowed to continue, eventually the christian celebration of easter would be occurring in early winter. pope gregory xiii, a contemporary of galileo, felt it necessary to institute further calendar reform. the gregorian calendar reform consisted of two steps.
first, 10 days had to be dropped out of the calendar to bring the vernal equinox back to march 21; by proclamation, the day following october 4, 1582, became october 15. the second feature of the new gregorian calendar was a change in the rule for leap year, making the average length of the year more closely approximate the tropical year. gregory decreed that three of every four century years—all leap years under the julian calendar—would be common years henceforth. the rule was that only century years divisible by 400 would be leap years. thus, 1700, 1800, and 1900—all divisible by 4 but not by 400—were not leap years in the gregorian calendar. on the other hand, the years 1600 and 2000, both divisible by 400, were leap years. the average length of this gregorian year, 365.2425 mean solar days, is correct to about 1 day in 3300 years.
the catholic countries immediately put the gregorian reform into effect, but countries of the eastern church 116 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page134_img1.jpeg] and most protestant countries did not adopt it until much later. it was 1752 when england and the american colonies finally made the change. by parliamentary decree, september 2, 1752, was followed by september 14. although special laws were passed to prevent such abuses as landlords collecting a full month’s rent for september, there were still riots, and people demanded their 12 days back. russia did not abandon the julian calendar until the time of the bolshevik revolution. the russians then had to omit 13 days to come into step with the rest of the world. the anniversary of the october revolution (old calendar) of 1917, bringing the communists to power, thus ended up being celebrated in november (new calendar), a difference that is perhaps not so important since the fall of communism.