3. describe two ways of determining the diameter of a star. 4. what are the largest- and smallest-known values of the mass, luminosity, surface temperature, and diameter of stars (roughly)? 5. you are able to take spectra of both stars in an eclipsing binary system. list all properties of the stars that can be measured from their spectra and light curves. 6. sketch an h–r diagram. label the axes. show where cool supergiants, white dwarfs, the sun, and main- sequence stars are found. 7. describe what a typical star in the galaxy would be like compared to the sun. 8. how do we distinguish stars from brown dwarfs? how do we distinguish brown dwarfs from planets? 9. describe how the mass, luminosity, surface temperature, and radius of main-sequence stars change in value going from the “bottom” to the “top” of the main sequence. 10. one method to measure the diameter of a star is to use an object like the moon or a planet to block out its light and to measure the time it takes to cover up the object.
why is this method used more often with the moon rather than the planets, even though there are more planets? 11. we discussed in the chapter that about half of stars come in pairs, or multiple star systems, yet the first eclipsing binary was not discovered until the eighteenth century. why? thought questions 12. is the sun an average star? why or why not? 13. suppose you want to determine the average educational level of people throughout the nation. since it would be a great deal of work to survey every citizen, you decide to make your task easier by asking only the people on your campus. will you get an accurate answer? will your survey be distorted by a selection effect? explain. 14. why do most known visual binaries have relatively long periods and most spectroscopic binaries have relatively short periods? 15. figure 18.11 shows the light curve of a hypothetical eclipsing binary star in which the light of one star is completely blocked by another. what would the light curve look like for a system in which the light of the smaller star is only partially blocked by the larger one? assume the smaller star is the hotter one.
sketch 18 • exercises 631 the relative positions of the two stars that correspond to various portions of the light curve. 16. there are fewer eclipsing binaries than spectroscopic binaries. explain why. 17. within 50 light-years of the sun, visual binaries outnumber eclipsing binaries. why? 18. which is easier to observe at large distances—a spectroscopic binary or a visual binary? 19. the eclipsing binary algol drops from maximum to minimum brightness in about 4 hours, remains at minimum brightness for 20 minutes, and then takes another 4 hours to return to maximum brightness. assume that we view this system exactly edge-on, so that one star crosses directly in front of the other. is one star much larger than the other, or are they fairly similar in size? (hint: refer to the diagrams of eclipsing binary light curves.) 20. review this spectral data for five stars. table a star spectrum 1 g, main sequence 2 k, giant 3 k, main sequence 4 o, main sequence 5 m, main sequence which is the hottest? coolest? most luminous? least luminous? in each case, give your reasoning. 21.
which changes by the largest factor along the main sequence from spectral types o to m—mass or luminosity? 22. suppose you want to search for brown dwarfs using a space telescope. will you design your telescope to detect light in the ultraviolet or the infrared part of the spectrum? why? 23. an astronomer discovers a type-m star with a large luminosity. how is this possible? what kind of star is it? 24. approximately 9000 stars are bright enough to be seen without a telescope. are any of these white dwarfs? use the information given in this chapter to explain your reasoning. 25. use the data in appendix j to plot an h–r diagram for the brightest stars. use the data from table 18.3 to show where the main sequence lies. do 90% of the brightest stars lie on or near the main sequence? explain why or why not. 26. use the diagram you have drawn for exercise 18.25 to answer the following questions: which star is more massive—sirius or alpha centauri? rigel and regulus have nearly the same spectral type. which is larger? rigel and betelgeuse have nearly the same luminosity.