(a) as a comet nears the sun, its features become more visible. in this illustration from nasa showing comet hale-bopp, you can see a comet’s two tails: the more easily visible dust tail, which can be up to 10 million kilometers long, and the fainter gas tail (or ion tail), which is up to hundreds of millions of kilometers long. the grains that make up the dust tail are the size of smoke particles. (b) comet mrkos was photographed in 1957 with a wide-field telescope at palomar observatory and also shows a clear distinction between the straight gas tail and the curving dust tail. (credit a: modification of work by eso/e. slawik; credit b: modification of work by charles kearns, george o. abell, and byron hill) these days, comets close to the sun can be found with spacecraft designed to observe our star.
for example, in early july, 2011, astronomers at the esa/nasa’s solar and heliospheric observatory (soho) link to learning 456 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page474_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page474_img2.jpeg] witnessed a comet (https://openstax.org/l/30esanasacomet) streaking toward the sun, one of almost 3000 such sightings. you can also watch a brief video by nasa entitled “why are we seeing so many sungrazing comets?” the rosetta comet mission the 1976 giotto flyby of comet halley, which gave us the first picture of an active comet nucleus, was a watershed in our understanding of comets. in the 1990s, european scientists decided to design a much more ambitious mission that would match orbits with an incoming comet and follow it as it approached the sun. they also proposed that a smaller spacecraft would actually try to land on the comet.
the 2-ton main spacecraft was named rosetta, carrying a dozen scientific instruments, and its 100-kilogram lander with nine more instruments was named philae. the rosetta mission was launched in 2004. delays with the launch rocket caused it to miss its original target comet, so an alternate destination was picked, comet churyumov-gerasimenko (named after the two discoverers, but generally denoted 67p). this comet’s period of revolution is 6.45 years, making it a jupiter- family comet. since the european space agency did not have access to the plutonium-fueled nuclear power sources used by nasa for deep space missions, rosetta had to be solar powered, requiring especially large solar panels. even these were not enough to keep the craft operating as it matched orbits with 67p near the comet’s aphelion. the only solution was to turn off all the spacecraft systems and let it coast for several years toward the sun, out of contact with controllers on earth until solar energy was stronger. the success of the mission depended on an automatic timer to turn the power back on as it neared the sun. fortunately, this strategy worked.
in august 2014, rosetta began a gradual approach to the comet nucleus, which is a strangely misshapen object about 5 kilometers across, quite different from the smooth appearance of halley’s nucleus (but equally dark). its rotation period is 12 hours. on november 12, 2014, the philae lander was dropped, descending slowly for 7 hours before gently hitting the surface. it bounced and rolled, coming to rest under an overhang where there was not enough sunlight to keep its batteries charged. after operating for a few hours and sending data back to the orbiter, philae went silent. the main rosetta spacecraft continued operations, however, as the level of comet activity increased, with steamers of gas jetting from the surface. as the comet approached perihelion in september 2015, the spacecraft backed off to ensure its safety. the extent of the rosetta images (and data from other instruments) far exceeds anything astronomers had seen before from a comet. the best imaging resolution was nearly a factor of 100 greater than in the best halley images. at this scale, the comet appears surprisingly rough, with sharp angles, deep pits, and overhangs (figure 13.24).