after college, cannon spent a decade with her parents but was very dissatisfied, longing to do scientific work. after her mother’s death in 1893, she returned to wellesley as a teaching assistant and also to take courses at radcliffe, the women’s college associated with harvard. figure 17.7 annie jump cannon (1863–1941). cannon is well-known for her classifications of stellar spectra. (credit: modification voyagers in astronomy 17.3 • the spectra of stars (and brown dwarfs) 583 [image: astronomy_openstax_page601_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page601_img2.jpeg] of work by smithsonian institution) in the late 1800s, the director of the harvard observatory, edward c. pickering, needed lots of help with his ambitious program of classifying stellar spectra. the basis for these studies was a monumental collection of nearly a million photographic spectra of stars, obtained from many years of observations made at harvard college observatory in massachusetts as well as at its remote observing stations in south america and south africa.
pickering quickly discovered that educated young women could be hired as assistants for one- third or one-fourth the salary paid to men, and they would often put up with working conditions and repetitive tasks that men with the same education would not tolerate. these women became known as the harvard computers. (we should emphasize that astronomers were not alone in reaching such conclusions about the relatively new idea of upper-class, educated women working outside the home: women were exploited and undervalued in many fields. this is a legacy from which our society is just beginning to emerge.) cannon was hired by pickering as one of the “computers” to help with the classification of spectra. she became so good at it that she could visually examine and determine the spectral types of several hundred stars per hour (dictating her conclusions to an assistant). she made many discoveries while investigating the harvard photographic plates, including 300 variable stars (stars whose luminosity changes periodically). but her main legacy is a marvelous catalog of spectral types for hundreds of thousands of stars, which served as a foundation for much of twentieth-century astronomy.
in 1911, a visiting committee of astronomers reported that “she is the one person in the world who can do this work quickly and accurately” and urged harvard to give cannon an official appointment in keeping with her skill and renown. not until 1938, however, did harvard appoint her an astronomer at the university; she was then 75 years old. cannon received the first honorary degree oxford awarded to a woman, and she became the first woman to be elected an officer of the american astronomical society, the main professional organization of astronomers in the us. she generously donated the money from one of the major prizes she had won to found a special award for women in astronomy, now known as the annie jump cannon prize. true to form, she continued classifying stellar spectra almost to the very end of her life in 1941. spectral classes l, t, and y the scheme devised by cannon worked well until 1988, when astronomers began to discover objects even cooler than m9-type stars. we use the word object because many of the new discoveries are not true stars.
a star is defined as an object that during some part of its lifetime derives 100% of its energy from the same process that makes the sun shine—the fusion of hydrogen nuclei (protons) into helium. objects with masses less than about 7.5% of the mass of our sun (about 0.075 msun) do not become hot enough for hydrogen fusion to take place. even before the first such “failed star” was found, this class of objects, with masses intermediate between stars and planets, was given the name brown dwarfs. brown dwarfs are very difficult to observe because they are extremely faint and cool, and they put out most of their light in the infrared part of the spectrum. it was only after the construction of very large telescopes, like the keck telescopes in hawaii, and the development of very sensitive infrared detectors, that the search for brown dwarfs succeeded. the first brown dwarf was discovered in 1988, and, since then, thousands of others have been found. initially, brown dwarfs were given spectral classes like m10+ or “much cooler than m9,” but so many are now known that it is possible to begin assigning spectral types.