this image shows part of a cluster of stars in the small magellanic cloud (catalog number ngc 290). located about 200,000 light-years away, ngc 290 is about 65 light-years across. because the stars in this cluster are all at about the same distance from us, the differences in apparent brightness correspond to differences in luminosity; differences in temperature account for the differences in color. the various colors and luminosities of these stars provide clues about their life stories. (credit: modification of work by e. olszewski (university of arizona), european space agency, nasa) chapter outline 18.1 a stellar census 18.2 measuring stellar masses 18.3 diameters of stars 18.4 the h–r diagram thinking ahead how do stars form? how long do they live? and how do they die? stop and think how hard it is to answer these questions. stars live such a long time that nothing much can be gained from staring at one for a human lifetime. to discover how stars evolve from birth to death, it was necessary to measure the characteristics of many stars (to take a celestial census, in effect) and then determine which characteristics help us understand the stars’ life stories.
astronomers tried a variety of hypotheses about stars until they came up with the right approach to understanding their development. but the key was first making a thorough census of the stars around us. 18.1 a stellar census learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: before we can make our own survey, we need to agree on a unit of distance appropriate to the objects we are studying. the stars are all so far away that kilometers (and even astronomical units) would be very explain why the stars visible to the unaided eye are not typical describe the distribution of stellar masses found close to the sun the stars: a celestial census 18 [image: astronomy_openstax_page621_img1.jpeg] cumbersome to use; so—as discussed in science and the universe: a brief tour—astronomers use a much larger “measuring stick” called the light-year. a light-year is the distance that light (the fastest signal we know) travels in 1 year. since light covers an astounding 300,000 kilometers per second, and since there are a lot of seconds in 1 year, a light-year is a very large quantity: 9.5 trillion kilometers to be exact.
(bear in mind that the light-year is a unit of distance even though the term year appears in it.) if you drove at the legal us speed limit without stopping for food or rest, you would not arrive at the end of a light-year in space until roughly 12 million years had passed. and the closest star is more than 4 light-years away. notice that we have not yet said much about how such enormous distances can be measured. that is a complicated question, to which we will return in celestial distances. for now, let us assume that distances have been measured for stars in our cosmic vicinity so that we can proceed with our census. small is beautiful—or at least more common when we do a census of people in the united states, we count the inhabitants by neighborhood. we can try the same approach for our stellar census and begin with our own immediate neighborhood. as we shall see, we run into two problems—just as we do with a census of human beings. first, it is hard to be sure we have counted all the inhabitants; second, our local neighborhood may not contain all possible types of people.
table 18.1 shows an estimate of the number of stars of each spectral type1 in our own local neighborhood—within 21 light-years of the sun. (the milky way galaxy, in which we live, is about 100,000 light-years in diameter, so this figure really applies to a very local neighborhood, one that contains a tiny fraction of all the billions of stars in the milky way.) you can see that there are many more low-luminosity (and hence low mass) stars than high-luminosity ones. only three of the stars in our local neighborhood (one f type and two a types) are significantly more luminous and more massive than the sun. this is truly a case where small triumphs over large—at least in terms of numbers. the sun is more massive than the vast majority of stars in our vicinity. stars within 21 light-years of the sun spectral type number of stars a 2 f 1 g 7 k 17 m 94 white dwarfs 8 brown dwarfs 33 table 18.1 this table is based on data published through 2015, and it is likely that more faint objects remain to be discovered (see figure 18.2).