(its height is almost three times the height of the tallest mountain on earth.) (credit: modification of work by nasa/usgs) a second difference relates to the strength of gravity on the three planets. the surface gravity on venus is nearly the same as that on earth, but on mars it is only about one third as great. in order for a mountain to survive, its internal strength must be great enough to support its weight against the force of gravity. volcanic rocks have known strengths, and we can calculate that on earth, 10 kilometers is about the limit. for instance, when new lava is added to the top of mauna loa in hawaii, the mountain slumps downward under its own weight. the same height limit applies on venus, where the force of gravity is the same as earth’s. on mars, however, with its lesser surface gravity, much greater elevation differences can be supported, which helps explain why olympus mons is more than twice as high as the tallest mountains of venus or earth. by the way, the same kind of calculation that determines the limiting height of a mountain can be used to ascertain the largest body that can have an irregular shape.
gravity, if it can, pulls all objects into the most “efficient” shape (where all the outside points are equally distant from the center). all the planets and larger moons are nearly spherical, due to the force of their own gravity pulling them into a sphere. but the smaller the object, the greater the departure from spherical shape that the strength of its rocks can support. for silicate bodies, the limiting diameter is about 400 kilometers; larger objects will always be approximately spherical, while smaller ones can have almost any shape (as we see in photographs of asteroids, such as figure 14.21). 14.5 • planetary evolution 499 [image: astronomy_openstax_page517_img1.jpeg] figure 14.21 irregular asteroid. small objects such as asteroid ida (shown here in multiple views taken by the galileo spacecraft camera as it flew past) are generally irregular or elongated; they do not have strong enough gravity to pull them into a spherical shape. ida is about 60 kilometers long in its longest dimension. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl) atmospheres the atmospheres of the planets were formed by a combination of gas escaping from their interiors and the impacts of volatile-rich debris from the outer solar system.
each of the terrestrial planets must have originally had similar atmospheres, but mercury was too small and too hot to retain its gas. the moon probably never had an atmosphere since the material composing it was depleted in volatile materials. the predominant volatile gas on the terrestrial planets is now carbon dioxide (co2), but initially there were probably also hydrogen-containing gases. in this more chemically reduced (hydrogen-dominated) environment, there should have been large amounts of carbon monoxide (co) and traces of ammonia (nh3) and methane (ch4). ultraviolet light from the sun split apart the molecules of reducing gases in the inner solar system, however. most of the light hydrogen atoms escaped, leaving behind the oxidized (oxygen-dominated) atmospheres we see today on earth, venus, and mars. the fate of water was different on each of these three planets, depending on its size and distance from the sun. early in its history, mars apparently had a thick atmosphere with abundant liquid water, but it could not retain those conditions. the co2 necessary for a substantial greenhouse effect was lost, the temperature dropped, and eventually the remaining water froze. on venus the reverse process took place, with a runaway greenhouse effect leading to the permanent loss of water.
only earth managed to maintain the delicate balance that permits liquid water to persist on its surface. with the water gone, venus and mars each ended up with an atmosphere of about 96 percent carbon dioxide and a few percent nitrogen. on earth, the presence first of water and then of life led to a very different kind of atmosphere. the co2 was removed and deposited in marine sediment. the proliferation of life forms that could photosynthesize eventually led to the release of more oxygen than natural chemical reactions can remove from the atmosphere. as a result, thanks to the life on its surface, earth finds itself with a great deficiency of co2, with nitrogen as the most abundant gas, and the only planetary atmosphere that contains free oxygen. in the outer solar system, titan is the only moon with a substantial atmosphere. this object must have contained sufficient volatiles—such as ammonia, methane, and nitrogen—to form an atmosphere. thus, today titan’s atmosphere consists primarily of nitrogen. compared with those on the inner planets, temperatures on titan are too low for either carbon dioxide or water to be in vapor form. with these two common volatiles frozen solid, it is perhaps not too surprising that nitrogen has ended up as the primary atmospheric constituent.