we have all seen an example of reddening on earth. the sun appears much redder at sunset than it does at noon. the lower the sun is in the sky, the longer the path its light must travel through the atmosphere. over this greater distance, there is a greater chance that sunlight will be scattered. since red light is less likely to be scattered than blue light, the sun appears more and more red as it approaches the horizon. by the way, scattering of sunlight is also what causes our sky to look blue, even though the gases that make up earth’s atmosphere are transparent. as sunlight comes in, it scatters from the molecules of air. the small size of the molecules means that the blue colors scatter much more efficiently than the greens, yellows, and reds. thus, the blue in sunlight is scattered out of the beam and all over the sky. the light from the sun that comes to your eye, on the other hand, is missing some of its blue, so the sun looks a bit yellower, even when it is high in the sky, than it would from space. the fact that starlight is reddened by interstellar dust means that long-wavelength radiation is transmitted through the galaxy more efficiently than short-wavelength radiation.
consequently, if we wish to see farther in a direction with considerable interstellar material, we should look at long wavelengths. this simple fact provides one of the motivations for the development of infrared astronomy. in the infrared region at 2 microns (2000 nanometers), for example, the obscuration is only one-sixth as great as in the visible region (500 nanometers), and we can therefore study stars that are more than twice as distant before their light is blocked by interstellar dust. this ability to see farther by observing in the infrared portion of the spectrum represents a major gain for astronomers trying to understand the structure of our galaxy or probing its puzzling, but distant, center (see the milky way galaxy). interstellar grains before we get to the details about interstellar dust, we should perhaps get one concern out of the way. why couldn’t it be the interstellar gas that reddens distant stars and not the dust? we already know from everyday experience that atomic or molecular gas is almost transparent. consider earth’s atmosphere. despite its very high density compared with that of interstellar gas, it is so transparent as to be practically invisible.
(gas does have a few specific spectral lines, but they absorb only a tiny fraction of the light as it passes through.)the quantity of gas required to produce the observed absorption of light in interstellar space would have to be enormous. the gravitational attraction of so great a mass of gas would affect the motions of stars in ways that could easily be detected. such motions are not observed, and thus, the interstellar absorption cannot be the result of gases. although gas does not absorb much light, we know from everyday experience that tiny solid or liquid particles 684 20 • between the stars: gas and dust in space access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page702_img1.jpeg] can be very efficient absorbers. water vapor in the air is quite invisible. when some of that vapor condenses into tiny water droplets, however, the resulting cloud is opaque. dust storms, smoke, and smog offer familiar examples of the efficiency with which solid particles absorb light. on the basis of arguments like these, astronomers have concluded that widely scattered solid particles in interstellar space must be responsible for the observed dimming of starlight. what are these particles made of? and how did they form?
observations like the pictures in this chapter show that a great deal of this dust exists; hence, it must be primarily composed of elements that are abundant in the universe (and in interstellar matter). after hydrogen and helium, the most abundant elements are oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen. these three elements, along with magnesium, silicon, iron—and perhaps hydrogen itself—turn out to be the most important components of interstellar dust. many of the dust particles can be characterized as sootlike (rich in carbon) or sandlike (containing silicon and oxygen). grains of interstellar dust are found in meteorites and can be identified because the abundances of certain isotopes are different from what we see in other solar system material. several different interstellar dust substances have been identified in this way in the laboratory, including graphite and diamonds. (don’t get excited; these diamonds are only a billionth of a meter in size and would hardly make an impressive engagement ring!) the most widely accepted model pictures the grains with rocky cores that are either like soot (rich in carbon) or like sand (rich in silicates). in the dark clouds where molecules can form, these cores are covered by icy mantles (figure 20.16).