for example, the quantum fluctuations in the very early universe would have caused variations in density and produced gravitational waves that may have left a detectable imprint on the cmb. detection of such an imprint will require observations with equipment whose sensitivity is improved from what we have today. ultimately, however, it may provide confirmation that we live in a universe that once experienced an epoch of rapid inflation. if you are typical of the students who read this book, you may have found this brief discussion of dark matter, inflation, and cosmology a bit frustrating. we have offered glimpses of theories and observations, but have raised more questions than we have answered. what is dark matter? what is dark energy? inflation explains the observations of flatness and uniformity of the university, but did it actually happen? these ideas are at the forefront of modern science, where progress almost always leads to new puzzles, and much more work is needed before we can see clearly. bear in mind that less than a century has passed since hubble demonstrated the existence of other galaxies. the quest to understand just how the universe of galaxies came to be will keep astronomers busy for a long time to come.
29.7 the anthropic principle learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: name some properties of the universe that, if different, would have precluded the development of humans 3 this name became the title of a film about physicist stephen hawking in 2014. 1044 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org despite our uncertainties, we must admit that the picture we have developed about the evolution of our universe is a remarkable one. with new telescopes, we have begun to collect enough observational evidence that we can describe how the universe evolved from a mere fraction of a second after the expansion began. although this is an impressive achievement, there are still some characteristics of the universe that we cannot explain. and yet, it turns out that if these characteristics were any different, we would not be here to ask about them. let’s look at some of these “lucky accidents,” beginning with the observations of the cosmic microwave background (cmb). lucky accidents as we described in this chapter, the cmb is radiation that was emitted when the universe was a few hundred thousand years old.
observations show that the temperature of the radiation varies from one region to another, typically by about 10 millionths of a degree, and these temperature differences signal small differences in density. but suppose the tiny, early fluctuations in density had been much smaller. then calculations show that the pull of gravity near them would have been so small that no galaxies would ever have formed. what if the fluctuations in density had been much larger? then it is possible that very dense regions would have condensed, and these would simply have collapsed directly to black holes without ever forming galaxies and stars. even if galaxies had been able to form in such a universe, space would have been filled with intense x-rays and gamma rays, and it would have been difficult for life forms to develop and survive. the density of stars within galaxies would be so high that interactions and collisions among them would be frequent. in such a universe, any planetary systems could rarely survive long enough for life to develop. so for us to be here, the density fluctuations need to be “just right”—not too big and not too small. another lucky accident is that the universe is finely balanced between expansion and contraction. it is expanding, but very slowly.
if the expansion had been at a much higher rate, all of the matter would have thinned out before galaxies could form. if everything were expanding at a much slower rate, then gravity would have “won.” the expansion would have reversed and all of the matter would have recollapsed, probably into a black hole—again, no stars, no planets, no life. the development of life on earth depends on still-luckier coincidences. had matter and antimatter been present initially in exactly equal proportions, then all matter would have been annihilated and turned into pure energy. we owe our existence to the fact that there was slightly more matter than antimatter. (after most of the matter made contact with an equal amount of antimatter, turning into energy, a small amount of additional matter must have been present. we are all descendants of that bit of “unbalanced” matter.) if nuclear fusion reactions occurred at a somewhat faster rate than they actually do, then at the time of the initial fireball, all of the matter would have been converted from hydrogen into helium into carbon and all the way into iron (the most stable nucleus).