in 1894, the controversial (and wealthy) astronomer percival lowell established an observatory in flagstaff, arizona, to study the planets and search for life in the universe. lowell thought that the spiral nebulae might be solar systems in the process of formation. he therefore asked one of the observatory’s young astronomers, vesto m. slipher (figure 26.13), to photograph the spectra of some of the spiral nebulae to see if their spectral lines might show chemical compositions like those expected for newly forming planets. describe the discovery that galaxies getting farther apart as the universe evolves explain how to use hubble’s law to determine distances to remote galaxies describe models for the nature of an expanding universe explain the variation in hubble’s constant 26.5 • the expanding universe 913 figure 26.13 vesto m. slipher (1875–1969). slipher spent his entire career at the lowell observatory, where he discovered the large radial velocities of galaxies. (credit: lowell observatory) the lowell observatory’s major instrument was a 24-inch refracting telescope, which was not at all well suited to observations of faint spiral nebulae.
with the technology available in those days, photographic plates had to be exposed for 20 to 40 hours to produce a good spectrum (in which the positions of the lines could reveal a galaxy’s motion). this often meant continuing to expose the same photograph over several nights. beginning in 1912, and making heroic efforts over a period of about 20 years, slipher managed to photograph the spectra of more than 40 of the spiral nebulae (which would all turn out to be galaxies). to his surprise, the spectral lines of most galaxies showed an astounding redshift. by “redshift” we mean that the lines in the spectra are displaced toward longer wavelengths (toward the red end of the visible spectrum). recall from the chapter on radiation and spectra that a redshift is seen when the source of the waves is moving away from us. slipher’s observations showed that most spirals are racing away at huge speeds; the highest velocity he measured was 1800 kilometers per second. only a few spirals—such as the andromeda and triangulum galaxies and m81—all of which are now known to be our close neighbors, turned out to be approaching us. all the other galaxies were moving away.
slipher first announced this discovery in 1914, years before hubble showed that these objects were other galaxies and before anyone knew how far away they were. no one at the time quite knew what to make of this discovery. hubble’s law the profound implications of slipher’s work became apparent only during the 1920s. georges lemaître was a belgian priest and a trained astronomer. in 1927, he published a paper in french in an obscure belgian journal in which he suggested that we live in an expanding universe. the title of the paper (translated into english) is “a homogenous universe of constant mass and growing radius accounting for the radial velocity of extragalactic nebulae.” lemaître had discovered that einstein’s equations of relativity were consistent with an expanding universe (as had the russian scientist alexander friedmann independently in 1922). lemaître then went on to use slipher’s data to support the hypothesis that the universe actually is expanding and to estimate the rate of expansion. initially, scientists paid little attention to this paper, perhaps because the belgian journal was not widely available.
in the meantime, hubble was making observations of galaxies with the 2.5-meter telescope on mt. wilson, which was then the world’s largest. hubble carried out the key observations in collaboration with a remarkable man, milton humason, who dropped out of school in the eighth grade and began his astronomical career by driving a mule train up the trail on mount wilson to the observatory (figure 26.14). in those early days, supplies had to be brought up that way; even astronomers hiked up to the mountaintop for their turns at the 914 26 • galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page932_img1.jpeg] telescope. humason became interested in the work of the astronomers and, after marrying the daughter of the observatory’s electrician, took a job as janitor there. after a time, he became a night assistant, helping the astronomers run the telescope and record data. eventually, he made such a mark that he became a full astronomer at the observatory. figure 26.14 georges lemaitre (1894–1966) and milton humason (1891–1972).