aristotle cited convincing arguments that earth must be round. first is the fact that as the moon enters or emerges from earth’s shadow during an eclipse of the moon, the shape of the shadow seen on the moon is always round (figure 2.9). only a spherical object always produces a round shadow. if earth were a disk, for example, there would be some occasions when the sunlight would strike it edge-on and its shadow on the moon would be a line. figure 2.9 earth’s round shadow. a lunar eclipse occurs when the moon moves into and out of earth’s shadow. note the curved shape of the shadow—evidence for a spherical earth that has been recognized since antiquity. (credit: modification of work by brian paczkowski) as a second argument, aristotle explained that travelers who go south a significant distance are able to observe stars that are not visible farther north. and the height of the north star—the star nearest the north celestial pole—decreases as a traveler moves south. on a flat earth, everyone would see the same stars overhead. the only possible explanation is that the traveler must have moved over a curved surface on earth, showing stars from a different angle.
(see the how do we know earth is round? feature for more ideas on proving earth is round.) one greek thinker, aristarchus of samos (310–230 bce), even suggested that earth was moving around the sun, but aristotle and most of the ancient greek scholars rejected this idea. one of the reasons for their conclusion was the thought that if earth moved about the sun, they would be observing the stars from different places along earth’s orbit. as earth moved along, nearby stars should shift their positions in the sky relative to more distant stars. in a similar way, we see foreground objects appear to move against a more distant background whenever we are in motion. when we ride on a train, the trees in the foreground appear to shift their position relative to distant hills as the train rolls by. unconsciously, we use this phenomenon all of the time to estimate distances around us. the apparent shift in the direction of an object as a result of the motion of the observer is called parallax. we call the shift in the apparent direction of a star due to earth’s orbital motion stellar parallax.
the greeks made dedicated efforts to observe stellar parallax, even enlisting the aid of greek soldiers with the clearest vision, but to no avail. the brighter (and presumably nearer) stars just did not seem to shift as the greeks observed them in the spring and then again in the fall (when earth is on the opposite side of the sun). this meant either that earth was not moving or that the stars had to be so tremendously far away that the parallax shift was immeasurably small. a cosmos of such enormous extent required a leap of imagination that most ancient philosophers were not prepared to make, so they retreated to the safety of the earth-centered 44 2 • observing the sky: the birth of astronomy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page62_img1.jpeg] view, which would dominate western thinking for nearly two millennia. how do we know earth is round? in addition to the two ways (from aristotle’s writings) discussed in this chapter, you might also reason as follows: 1. let’s watch a ship leave its port and sail into the distance on a clear day.
on a flat earth, we would just see the ship get smaller and smaller as it sails away. but this isn’t what we actually observe. instead, ships sink below the horizon, with the hull disappearing first and the mast remaining visible for a while longer. eventually, only the top of the mast can be seen as the ship sails around the curvature of earth. finally, the ship disappears under the horizon. 2. the international space station circles earth once every 90 minutes or so. photographs taken from the shuttle and other satellites show that earth is round from every perspective. 3. suppose you made a friend in each time zone of earth. you call all of them at the same hour and ask, “where is the sun?” on a flat earth, each caller would give you roughly the same answer. but on a round earth you would find that, for some friends, the sun would be high in the sky whereas for others it would be rising, setting, or completely out of sight (and this last group of friends would be upset with you for waking them up). measurement of earth by eratosthenes the greeks not only knew earth was round, but also they were able to measure its size.