therefore, the two astronomical ways of defining the local “day”—how long the planet takes to rotate and how long the sun takes to return to the same position in the sky—are the same on earth for most practical purposes. but this is not the case on mercury. while mercury rotates (spins once) in 59 earth days, the time for the sun to return to the same place in mercury’s sky turns out to be two mercury years, or 176 earth days. (note that this result is not making connections 9.5 • mercury 309 [image: astronomy_openstax_page327_img1.jpeg] intuitively obvious, so don’t be upset if you didn’t come up with it.) thus, if one day at noon a mercury explorer suggests to her companion that they should meet at noon the next day, this could mean a very long time apart! to make things even more interesting, recall that mercury has an eccentric orbit, meaning that its distance from the sun varies significantly during each mercurian year. by kepler’s law, the planet moves fastest in its orbit when closest to the sun. let’s examine how this affects the way we would see the sun in the sky during one 176-earth-day cycle.
we’ll look at the situation as if we were standing on the surface of mercury in the center of a giant basin that astronomers call caloris (figure 9.23). at the location of caloris, mercury is most distant from the sun at sunrise; this means the rising sun looks smaller in the sky (although still more than twice the size it appears from earth). as the sun rises higher and higher, it looks bigger and bigger; mercury is now getting closer to the sun in its eccentric orbit. at the same time, the apparent motion of the sun slows down as mercury’s faster motion in orbit begins to catch up with its rotation. at noon, the sun is now three times larger than it looks from earth and hangs almost motionless in the sky. as the afternoon wears on, the sun appears smaller and smaller, and moves faster and faster in the sky. at sunset, a full mercury year (or 88 earth days after sunrise), the sun is back to its smallest apparent size as it dips out of sight. then it takes another mercury year before the sun rises again.
(by the way, sunrises and sunsets are much more sudden on mercury, since there is no atmosphere to bend or scatter the rays of sunlight.) astronomers call locations like the caloris basin the “hot longitudes” on mercury because the sun is closest to the planet at noon, just when it is lingering overhead for many earth days. this makes these areas the hottest places on mercury. we bring all this up not because the exact details of this scenario are so important but to illustrate how many of the things we take for granted on earth are not the same on other worlds. as we’ve mentioned before, one of the best things about taking an astronomy class should be ridding you forever of any “earth chauvinism” you might have. the way things are on our planet is just one of the many ways nature can arrange reality. the day on mercury visualization (https://openstax.org/l/30dayonmerc) shows how mercury’s slow rotation leads to very long days and how this combines with its highly elliptical orbit to cause some unusual motions of the sun in the sky. note the stick figure on the surface of mercury; the day/night box shows what that stick figure would see in the sky.
the surface of mercury the first close-up look at mercury came in 1974, when the us spacecraft mariner 10 passed 9500 kilometers from the surface of the planet and transmitted more than 2000 photographs to earth, revealing details with a resolution down to 150 meters. subsequently, the planet was mapped in great detail by the messenger spacecraft, which was launched in 2004 and made multiple flybys of earth, venus, and mercury before settling into orbit around mercury in 2011. it ended its life in 2015, when it was commanded to crash into the surface of the planet. mercury’s surface strongly resembles the moon in appearance (figure 9.22 and figure 9.23). it is covered with link to learning 310 9 • cratered worlds access for free at openstax.org thousands of craters and larger basins up to 1300 kilometers in diameter. some of the brighter craters are rayed, like tycho and copernicus on the moon, and many have central peaks. there are also scarps (cliffs) more than a kilometer high and hundreds of kilometers long, as well as ridges and plains. messenger instruments measured the surface composition and mapped past volcanic activity.