(hint: think about the path that the light of a quasar took on its way to us and the path the light of a typical star takes.) g. the 8.4-meter telescope at the vera c. rubin observatory, currently under construction atop cerro pachón, a mountain in northern chile, will survey the entire sky with its 3.2-gigapixel camera every few days, looking for transient, or temporary, objects that make a brief appearance in the sky before fading from view, including asteroids and kuiper belt objects in our solar system, and supernovae and other explosive high-energy events in the distant universe. when it’s fully operating sometime after 2021, the lsst will produce up to 30 terabytes of data every night. (a terabyte is 1000 gigabytes, which is the unit you probably use to rate your computer or memory stick capacity.) with your group, consider what you think might be some challenges of dealing with that quantity of data every night in a scientifically productive but efficient way. can you propose any solutions to those challenges? h. quasars are rare now but were much more numerous when the universe was about one-quarter of its current age.
the total star formation taking place in galaxies across the universe peaked at about the same redshift. does your group think this is a coincidence? why or why not? i. one way to see how well the ideas in astronomy (like those in this chapter) have penetrated popular culture is to see whether you can find astronomical words in the marketplace. a short web search for the term “dark matter” turns up both a brand of coffee and a brand of “muscle growth accelerator” with that name. how many other terms used in this chapter can your group find in the world of products? (what’s a really popular type of android cell phone, for example?) j. what’s your complete address in the universe? group members should write out their full address, based on the information in this chapter (and the rest of the book). after your postal code and country, you may want to add continent, planet, planetary system, galaxy, etc. then each group member should explain this address to a family member or student not taking astronomy. exercises review questions 1. how are distant (young) galaxies different from the galaxies that we see in the universe today? 28 • exercises 1001 2.
what is the evidence that star formation began when the universe was only a few hundred million years old? 3. describe the evolution of an elliptical galaxy. how does the evolution of a spiral galaxy differ from that of an elliptical? 4. explain what we mean when we call the universe homogeneous and isotropic. would you say that the distribution of elephants on earth is homogeneous and isotropic? why? 5. describe the organization of galaxies into groupings, from the local group to superclusters. 6. what is the evidence that a large fraction of the matter in the universe is invisible? 7. when astronomers make maps of the structure of the universe on the largest scales, how do they find the superclusters of galaxies to be arranged? 8. how does the presence of an active galactic nucleus in a starburst galaxy affect the starburst process? thought questions 9. describe how you might use the color of a galaxy to determine something about what kinds of stars it contains. 10. suppose a galaxy formed stars for a few million years and then stopped (and no other galaxy merged or collided with it). what would be the most massive stars on the main sequence after 500 million years? after 10 billion years?
how would the color of the galaxy change over this time span? (refer to evolution from the main sequence to red giants.) 11. given the ideas presented here about how galaxies form, would you expect to find a giant elliptical galaxy in the local group? why or why not? is there in fact a giant elliptical in the local group? 12. can an elliptical galaxy evolve into a spiral? explain your answer. can a spiral turn into an elliptical? how? 13. if we see a double image of a quasar produced by a gravitational lens and can obtain a spectrum of the galaxy that is acting as the gravitational lens, we can then put limits on the distance to the quasar. explain how. 14. the left panel of figure 27.1 shows a cluster of yellow galaxies that produces several images of blue galaxies through gravitational lensing. which are more distant—the blue galaxies or the yellow galaxies? the light in the galaxies comes from stars. how do the temperatures of the stars that dominate the light of the cluster galaxies differ from the temperatures of the stars that dominate the light of the blue-lensed galaxy? which galaxy’s light is dominated by young stars? 15.