(back when astrology was first conceived, birth was thought of as a moment of magic significance, but today we understand a lot more about the long process that precedes it.) actually, very few well-educated people today buy the claim that our entire lives are predetermined by astrological influences at birth, but many people apparently believe that astrology has validity as an indicator of affinities and personality. a surprising number of americans make judgments about people—whom they will hire, associate with, and even marry—on the basis of astrological information. to be sure, these are difficult decisions, and you might argue that we should use any relevant information that might help us to make the right choices. but does astrology actually provide any useful information on human personality? this is the kind of question that can be tested using the scientific method (see testing astrology). the results of hundreds of tests are all the same: there is no evidence that natal astrology has any predictive power, even in a statistical sense. why, then, do people often seem to have anecdotes about how well their own astrologer advised them? effective astrologers today use the language of the zodiac and the horoscope only as the outward trappings of their craft.
mostly they work as amateur therapists, offering simple truths that clients like or need to hear. (recent studies have shown that just about any sort of short-term therapy makes people feel a little better because the very act of talking about our problems with someone who listens attentively is, in itself, beneficial.) 52 2 • observing the sky: the birth of astronomy access for free at openstax.org the scheme of astrology has no basis in scientific fact, however; at best, it can be described as a pseudoscience. it is an interesting historical system, left over from prescientific days and best remembered for the impetus it gave people to learn the cycles and patterns of the sky. from it grew the science of astronomy, which is our main subject for discussion. testing astrology in response to modern public interest in astrology, scientists have carried out a wide range of statistical tests to assess its predictive power. the simplest of these examine sun sign astrology to determine whether—as astrologers assert—some signs are more likely than others to be associated with some objective measure of success, such as winning olympic medals, earning high corporate salaries, or achieving elective office or high military rank.
(you can devise such a test yourself by looking up the birth dates of all members of congress, for example, or all members of the u.s. olympic team.) are our political leaders somehow selected at birth by their horoscopes and thus more likely to be leos, say, than scorpios? you do not even need to be specific about your prediction in such tests. after all, many practitioners of astrology disagree about which signs go with which personality characteristics. to demonstrate the validity of the astrological hypothesis, it would be sufficient if the birthdays of all our leaders clustered in any one or two signs in some statistically significant way. dozens of such tests have been performed, and all have come up completely negative: the birth dates of leaders in all fields tested have been found to be distributed randomly among all the signs. sun sign astrology does not predict anything about a person’s future occupation or strong personality traits. in a fine example of such a test, two statisticians examined the reenlistment records of the united states marine corps. we suspect you will agree that it takes a certain kind of personality not only to enlist, but also to reenlist in the marines.
if sun signs can predict strong personality traits—as astrologers claim—then those who reenlisted (with similar personalities) should have been distributed preferentially in those one or few signs that matched the personality of someone who loves being a marine. however, the reenlisted were distributed randomly among all the signs. more sophisticated studies have also been done, involving full horoscopes calculated for thousands of individuals. the results of all these studies are also negative: none of the systems of astrology has been shown to be at all effective in connecting astrological aspects to personality, success, or finding the right person to love. other tests show that it hardly seems to matter what a horoscope interpretation says, as long as it is vague enough, and as long as each subject feels it was prepared personally just for him or her. the french statistician michel gauquelin, for example, sent the horoscope interpretation for one of the worst mass murderers in history to 150 people, but told each recipient that it was a “reading” prepared exclusively for him or her. ninety-four percent of the readers said they recognized themselves in the interpretation of the mass murderer’s horoscope.