chandra developed his ideas during and after his studies as a graduate student, showing—as we have discussed—that white dwarfs with masses greater than 1.4 times the mass of the sun cannot exist and that the theory predicts the existence of other kinds of stellar corpses. he wrote later that he felt very shy and lonely during this period, isolated from students, afraid to assert himself, and sometimes waiting for hours to speak with some of the famous professors he had read about in india. his calculations soon brought him into conflict with certain distinguished astronomers, including sir arthur eddington, who publicly ridiculed chandra’s ideas. at a number of meetings of astronomers, such leaders in the field as henry norris russell refused to give chandra the opportunity to defend his ideas, while allowing his more senior critics lots of time to criticize them. yet chandra persevered, writing books and articles elucidating his theories, which turned out not only to be correct, but to lay the foundation for much of our modern understanding of the death of stars. in 1983, he received the nobel prize in physics for this early work.
in 1937, chandra came to the united states and joined the faculty at the university of chicago, where he remained for the rest of his life. there he devoted himself to research and teaching, making major contributions to many fields of astronomy, from our understanding of the motions of stars through the galaxy to the behavior of the bizarre objects called black holes (see black holes and curved spacetime). in 1999, nasa named its sophisticated orbiting x-ray telescope (designed in part to explore such stellar corpses) the chandra x-ray observatory. voyagers in astronomy 780 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page798_img1.jpeg] figure 23.3 s. chandrasekhar (1910–1995). chandra’s research provided the basis for much of what we now know about stellar corpses. (credit: modification of work by american institute of physics) chandra spent a great deal of time with his graduate students, supervising the research of more than 50 phds during his life.
he took his teaching responsibilities very seriously: during the 1940s, while based at the yerkes observatory, he willingly drove the more than 100-mile trip to the university each week to teach a class of only a few students. chandra also had a deep devotion to music, art, and philosophy, writing articles and books about the relationship between the humanities and science. he once wrote that “one can learn science the way one enjoys music or art. . . . heisenberg had a marvelous phrase ‘shuddering before the beautiful’. . . that is the kind of feeling i have.” using the hubble space telescope, astronomers were able to detect images (https://openstax.org/l/ 30hubimgwhidwa) of faint white dwarf stars and other “stellar corpses” in the m4 star cluster, located about 7200 light-years away. the ultimate fate of white dwarfs if the birth of a main-sequence star is defined by the onset of fusion reactions, then we must consider the end of all fusion reactions to be the time of a star’s death. as the core is stabilized by degeneracy pressure, a last shudder of fusion passes through the outside of the star, consuming the little hydrogen still remaining.
now the star is a true white dwarf: nuclear fusion in its interior has ceased. figure 23.4 shows the path of a star like the sun on the h–r diagram during its final stages. link to learning 23.1 • the death of low-mass stars 781 [image: astronomy_openstax_page799_img1.jpeg] figure 23.4 evolutionary track for a star like the sun. this diagram shows the changes in luminosity and surface temperature for a star with a mass like the sun’s as it nears the end of its life. after the star becomes a giant again (point a on the diagram), it will lose more and more mass as its core begins to collapse. the mass loss will expose the hot inner core, which will appear at the center of a planetary nebula. in this stage, the star moves across the diagram to the left as it becomes hotter and hotter during its collapse (point b). at first, the luminosity remains nearly constant, but as the star begins to cool off, it becomes less and less bright (point c). it is now a white dwarf and will continue to cool slowly for billions of years until all of its remaining store of energy is radiated away.