given the distance and energy expense involved, it seems unlikely that the dozens of ufos (and even ufo abductions) claimed each year could be visitors from other stars so fascinated by earth civilization that they are willing to expend fantastically large amounts of energy or time to reach us. nor does it seem credible that these visitors have made this long and expensive journey and then systematically avoided contacting our governments or political and intellectual leaders. not every ufo report has been explained (in many cases, the observations are sketchy or contradictory). but investigation almost always converts them to ifos (identified flying objects) or nfos (not-at-all flying objects). while some are hoaxes, others are natural phenomena, such as bright planets, ball lightning, fireballs (bright meteors), or even flocks of birds that landed in an oil slick to make their bellies reflective. still others are human craft, such as private planes with some lights missing, or secret military aircraft. it is also interesting that the group of people who most avidly look at the night sky, the amateur astronomers, have never reported ufo sightings.
further, not a single ufo has ever left behind any physical evidence that can be tested in a laboratory and shown to be of nonterrestrial origin. another common aspect of belief that aliens are visiting earth comes from people who have difficulty accepting human accomplishments. there are many books and tv shows, for example, that assert that humans could not have built the great pyramids of egypt, and therefore they must have been built by aliens. the huge statues (called moai) on easter island are also sometimes claimed to have been built by aliens. some people even think that the accomplishments of space exploration today are based on alien technology. however, the evidence from archaeology and history is clear: ancient monuments were built by ancient people, 1076 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org whose brains and ingenuity were every bit as capable as ours are today, even if they didn’t have electronic textbooks like you do. recently, media and social media have had a lot of excited stories about ufo sightings by military pilots and second-hand testimony at congressional hearings about ufo conspiracies. but serious investigations show that there is a lot less to these reports than meets the eye!
for three articles taking a dispassionate look at the recent claims, see these two skeptical inquirer articles "nasa studies ufos?" (https://openstax.org/l/ 30ufoconspiracy1) and "ufo whistleblowers go to washington" (https://openstax.org/l/ 30ufoconspiracy2), and this usa today article “the aliens haven't landed: why you should be skeptical of recent reports on ufo sightings” (https://openstax.org/l/30ufoconspiracy3). messages on spacecraft while space travel by living creatures seems very difficult, robot probes can travel over long distances and over long periods of time. five spacecraft—two pioneers, two voyagers, and new horizons—are now leaving the solar system. at their coasting speeds, they will take hundreds of thousands or millions of years to get anywhere close to another star. on the other hand, they were the first products of human technology to go beyond our home system, so we wanted to put messages on board to show where they came from. each pioneer carries a plaque with a pictorial message engraved on a gold-anodized aluminum plate (figure 30.18).
the voyagers, launched in 1977, have audio and video records attached, which allowed the inclusion of over 100 photographs and a selection of music from around the world. given the enormous space between stars in our section of the galaxy, it is very unlikely that these messages will ever be received by anyone. they are more like a note in a bottle thrown into the sea by a shipwrecked sailor, with no realistic expectation of its being found soon but a slim hope that perhaps someday, somehow, someone will know of the sender’s fate. figure 30.18 interstellar messages. (a) this is the image engraved on the plaques aboard the pioneer 10 and 11 spacecraft. the human figures are drawn in proportion to the spacecraft, which is shown behind them. the sun and planets in the solar system can be seen at the bottom, with the trajectory that the spacecraft followed. the lines and markings in the left center show the positions and pulse periods for a number of pulsars, which might help locate the spacecraft’s origins in space and time.