was your investment in the hubble space telescope worth it? 34. how much more light can the james webb space telescope (with its 6-m diameter mirror) gather than the hubble space telescope (with a diameter of 2.4 m)? 35. the palomar telescope’s 5-m mirror weighs 14.5 tons. if a 10-m mirror were constructed of the same thickness as palomar’s (only bigger), how much would it weigh? 6 • exercises 223 224 6 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 7.1 “self-portrait” of mars. this picture was taken by the curiosity rover on mars in 2012. the image is reconstructed digitally from 55 different images taken by a camera on the rover’s extended mast, so that the many positions of the mast (which acted like a selfie stick) are edited out.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/msss) chapter outline 7.1 overview of our planetary system 7.2 composition and structure of planets 7.3 dating planetary surfaces 7.4 origin of the solar system thinking ahead surrounding the sun is a complex system of worlds with a wide range of conditions: eight major planets, many dwarf planets, hundreds of moons, and countless smaller objects. thanks largely to visits by spacecraft, we can now envision the members of the solar system as other worlds like our own, each with its own chemical and geological history, and unique sights that interplanetary tourists may someday visit. some have called these past few decades the “golden age of planetary exploration,” comparable to the golden age of exploration in the fifteenth century, when great sailing ships plied earth’s oceans and humanity became familiar with our own planet’s surface. in this chapter, we discuss our planetary system and introduce the idea of comparative planetology—studying how the planets work by comparing them with one another. we want to get to know the planets not only for what we can learn about them, but also to see what they can tell us about the origin and evolution of the entire solar system.
in the upcoming chapters, we describe the better-known members of the solar system and begin to compare them to the thousands of planets that have been discovered recently, orbiting other stars. other worlds: an introduction to the solar system 7 [image: astronomy_openstax_page243_img1.jpeg] 7.1 overview of our planetary system learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the solar system1 consists of the sun and many smaller objects: the planets, their moons and rings, and such “debris” as asteroids, comets, and dust. decades of observation and spacecraft exploration have revealed that most of these objects formed together with the sun about 4.5 billion years ago. they represent clumps of material that condensed from an enormous cloud of gas and dust. the central part of this cloud became the sun, and a small fraction of the material in the outer parts eventually formed the other objects. during the past 50 years, we have learned more about the solar system than anyone imagined before the space age. in addition to gathering information with powerful new telescopes, we have sent spacecraft directly to many members of the planetary system.
(planetary astronomy is the only branch of our science in which we can, at least vicariously, travel to the objects we want to study.) with evocative names such as voyager, pioneer, curiosity, and pathfinder, our robot explorers have flown past, orbited, or landed on every planet, returning images and data that have dazzled both astronomers and the public. in the process, we have also investigated two dwarf planets, hundreds of fascinating moons, four ring systems, a dozen asteroids, and several comets (smaller members of our solar system that we will discuss later). our probes have penetrated the atmosphere of jupiter and landed on the surfaces of venus, mars, our moon, saturn’s moon titan, the asteroids eros, itokawa, ryugu, and bennu, and the comet churyumov-gerasimenko (usually referred to as 67p). humans have set foot on the moon and returned samples of its surface soil for laboratory analysis (figure 7.2). we have flown a helicopter drone on mars. we have even discovered other places in our solar system that might be able to support some kind of life. figure 7.2 astronauts on the moon.