whatever mechanism is responsible must be able to release new energy at rates that stagger our imaginations. the most dramatic changes in quasar brightness are equivalent to the energy released by 100,000 billion suns. to produce this much energy we would have to convert the total mass of about ten earths into energy every minute. moreover, because the fluctuations occur in such short times, the part of a quasar that is varying must be smaller than the distance light travels in the time it takes the variation to occur—typically a few months. to see why this must be so, let’s consider a cluster of stars 10 light-years in diameter at a very large distance from earth (see figure 27.6, in which earth is off to the right). suppose every star in this cluster somehow brightens simultaneously and remains bright. when the light from this event arrives at earth, we would first see the brighter light from stars on the near side; 5 years later we would see increased light from stars at the center. ten years would pass before we detected more light from stars on the far side. figure 27.6 how the size of a source affects the timescale of its variability.
this diagram shows why light variations from a large region in space appear to last for an extended period of time as viewed from earth. suppose all the stars in this cluster, which is 10 light-years across, brighten simultaneously and instantaneously. from earth, star a will appear to brighten 5 years before star b, which in turn will appear to brighten 5 years earlier than star c. it will take 10 years for an earth observer to get the full effect of the brightening. even though all stars in the cluster brightened at the same time, the fact that the cluster is 10 light-years wide means that 10 years must elapse before the increased light from every part of the cluster reaches us. from earth we would see the cluster get brighter and brighter, as light from more and more stars began to reach us. not until 10 years after the brightening began would we see the cluster reach maximum brightness. in other words, if an extended object suddenly flares up, it will seem to brighten over a period of time equal to the time it takes light to travel across the object from its far side. we can apply this idea to brightness changes in quasars to estimate their diameters.
because quasars typically vary (get brighter and dimmer) over periods of a few months, the region where the energy is generated can be no larger than a few light-months across. if it were larger, it would take longer than a few months for the light from the far side to reach us. how large is a region of a few light-months? pluto, usually the outermost (dwarf) planet in our solar system, is about 5.5 light-hours from us, while the nearest star is 4 light-years away. clearly a region a few light months across is tiny relative to the size of the entire galaxy. and some quasars vary even more rapidly, which means their energy is generated in an even smaller region. whatever mechanism powers the quasars must be able to generate more energy than that produced by an entire galaxy in a volume of space that, in some cases, is not much larger than our solar system. earlier evidence even before the discovery of quasars, there had been hints that something very strange was going on in the centers of at least some galaxies.
back in 1918, american astronomer heber curtis used the large lick 27.1 • quasars 933 [image: astronomy_openstax_page951_img1.jpeg] observatory telescope to photograph the galaxy messier 87 in the constellation virgo. on that photograph, he saw what we now call a jet coming from the center, or nucleus, of the galaxy (figure 27.7). this jet literally and figuratively pointed to some strange activity going on in that galaxy nucleus. but he had no idea what it was. no one else knew what to do with this space oddity either. the random factoid that such a central jet existed lay around for a quarter century, until carl seyfert, a young astronomer at mount wilson observatory, also in california, found half a dozen galaxies with extremely bright nuclei that were almost stellar, rather than fuzzy in appearance like most galaxy nuclei. using spectroscopy, he found that these nuclei contain gas moving at up to two percent the speed of light. that may not sound like much, but it is 6 million miles per hour, and more than 10 times faster than the typical motions of stars in galaxies. figure 27.7 m87 jet.