his students later remembered him as a man whose thinking was three times faster than just about anybody else’s. his memory was so phenomenal, he could correctly quote an enormous number of poems and limericks, the entire bible, tables of mathematical functions, and almost anything he had learned about astronomy. he was nervous, active, competitive, critical, and very articulate; he tended to dominate every meeting he attended. in outward appearance, he was an old-fashioned product of the nineteenth century who wore high-top black shoes and high starched collars, and carried an umbrella every day of his life. his 264 papers were enormously influential in many areas of astronomy. born in 1877, the son of a presbyterian minister, russell showed early promise. when he was 12, his family sent him to live with an aunt in princeton so he could attend a top preparatory school. he lived in the same house in that town until his death in 1957 (interrupted only by a brief stay in europe for graduate work). he was fond of recounting that both his mother and his maternal grandmother had won prizes in mathematics, and that he probably inherited his talents in that field from their side of the family.
before russell, american astronomers devoted themselves mainly to surveying the stars and making impressive catalogs of their properties, especially their spectra (as described in analyzing starlight. russell began to see that interpreting the spectra of stars required a much more sophisticated understanding of the physics of the atom, a subject that was being developed by european physicists in the 1910s and 1920s. russell embarked on a lifelong quest to ascertain the physical conditions inside stars from the clues in their spectra; his work inspired, and was continued by, a generation of astronomers, many trained by russell and his collaborators. russell also made important contributions in the study of binary stars and the measurement of star masses, the origin of the solar system, the atmospheres of planets, and the measurement of distances in astronomy, among other fields. he was an influential teacher and popularizer of astronomy, writing a column on astronomical topics for scientific american magazine for more than 40 years. he and two colleagues wrote a textbook for college astronomy classes that helped train astronomers and astronomy enthusiasts over several decades. that book set the scene for the kind of textbook you are now reading, which not only lays out the facts of astronomy but also explains how they fit together.
russell gave lectures voyagers in astronomy 18.4 • the h–r diagram 621 [image: astronomy_openstax_page639_img1.jpeg] around the country, often emphasizing the importance of understanding modern physics in order to grasp what was happening in astronomy. harlow shapley, director of the harvard college observatory, called russell “the dean of american astronomers.” russell was certainly regarded as the leader of the field for many years and was consulted on many astronomical problems by colleagues from around the world. today, one of the highest recognitions that an astronomer can receive is an award from the american astronomical society called the russell prize, set up in his memory. features of the h–r diagram following hertzsprung and russell, let us plot the temperature (or spectral class) of a selected group of nearby stars against their luminosity and see what we find (figure 18.14). such a plot is frequently called the hertzsprung–russell diagram, abbreviated h–r diagram. it is one of the most important and widely used diagrams in astronomy, with applications that extend far beyond the purposes for which it was originally developed more than a century ago.
figure 18.14 h–r diagram for a selected sample of stars. in such diagrams, luminosity is plotted along the vertical axis. along the horizontal axis, we can plot either temperature or spectral type (also sometimes called spectral class). several of the brightest stars are identified by name. most stars fall on the main sequence. it is customary to plot h–r diagrams in such a way that temperature increases toward the left and luminosity toward the top. notice the similarity to our plot of height and weight for people (figure 18.12). stars, like people, are not distributed over the diagram at random, as they would be if they exhibited all combinations of luminosity and temperature. instead, we see that the stars cluster into certain parts of the h–r diagram. the great majority are aligned along a narrow sequence running from the upper left (hot, highly luminous) to the lower right (cool, less luminous). this band of points is called the main sequence. it represents a relationship between temperature and luminosity that is followed by most stars.