(these layers were initially defined in earth as a planet.) 11.3 • atmospheres of the giant planets 379 [image: astronomy_openstax_page397_img1.jpeg] figure 11.11 saturn over five years. these beautiful images of saturn were recorded by the hubble space telescope between 1996 and 2000. since saturn is tilted by 27°, we see the orientation of saturn’s rings around its equator change as the planet moves along its orbit. note the horizontal bands in the atmosphere. (credit: modification of work by nasa and the hubble heritage team (stsci/ aura)) the diagrams in figure 11.12 show the structure and clouds in the atmospheres of all four jovian planets. on both jupiter and saturn, the temperature near the cloud tops is about 140 k (only a little cooler than the polar caps of mars). on jupiter, this cloud level is at a pressure of about 0.1 bar (one tenth the atmospheric pressure at the surface of earth), but on saturn it occurs lower in the atmosphere, at about 1 bar.
because the ammonia clouds lie so much deeper on saturn, they are more difficult to see, and the overall appearance of the planet is much blander than is jupiter’s appearance. figure 11.12 atmospheric structure of the jovian planets. in each diagram, the yellow line shows how the temperature (see the scale on the bottom) changes with altitude (see the scale at the left). the location of the main layers on each planet is also shown. within the tropospheres of these planets, the temperature and pressure both increase with depth. through breaks in the ammonia clouds, we can see tantalizing glimpses of other cloud layers that can form in these deeper regions of the atmosphere—regions that were sampled directly for jupiter by the galileo probe that fell into the planet. as it descended to a pressure of 5 bars, the probe should have passed into a region of frozen water clouds, then below that into clouds of liquid water droplets, perhaps similar to the common clouds of the terrestrial troposphere. at least this is what scientists expected. but the probe saw no water clouds, and it measured a surprisingly low abundance of water vapor in the atmosphere.
it soon became clear to the galileo scientists that the probe happened to descend through an unusually dry, cloud-free region of the atmosphere—a giant 380 11 • the giant planets access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page398_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page398_img2.jpeg] downdraft of cool, dry gas. andrew ingersoll of caltech, a member of the galileo team, called this entry site the “desert” of jupiter. it’s a pity that the probe did not enter a more representative region, but that’s the luck of the cosmic draw. the probe continued to make measurements to a pressure of 22 bars but found no other cloud layers before its instruments stopped working. it also detected lightning storms, but only at great distances, further suggesting that the probe itself was in a region of clear weather. above the visible ammonia clouds in jupiter’s atmosphere, we find the clear stratosphere, which reaches a minimum temperature near 120 k. at still higher altitudes, temperatures rise again, just as they do in the upper atmosphere of earth, because here the molecules absorb ultraviolet light from the sun.
the cloud colors are due to impurities, the product of chemical reactions among the atmospheric gases in a process we call photochemistry. in jupiter’s upper atmosphere, photochemical reactions create a variety of fairly complex compounds of hydrogen and carbon that form a thin layer of smog far above the visible clouds. we show this smog as a fuzzy orange region in figure 11.12; however, this thin layer does not block our view of the clouds beneath it. the visible atmosphere of saturn is composed of approximately 75% hydrogen and 25% helium, with trace amounts of methane, ethane, propane, and other hydrocarbons. the overall structure is similar to that of jupiter. temperatures are somewhat colder, however, and the atmosphere is more extended due to saturn’s lower surface gravity. thus, the layers are stretched out over a longer distance, as you can see in figure 11.12. overall, though, the same atmospheric regions, condensation cloud, and photochemical reactions that we see on jupiter should be present on saturn (figure 11.13). figure 11.13 cloud structure on saturn. in this cassini image, colors have been intensified, so we can see the bands and zones and storms in the atmosphere.