astronomers measured the doppler shift of spectral lines emitted by this gas, found its speed of rotation, and then used the speed to derive the amount of mass inside the disk—applying kepler’s third law. 936 27 • active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes access for free at openstax.org figure 27.8 evidence for a black hole at the center of m87. (a) the disk of whirling gas at right was discovered at the center of the giant elliptical galaxy m87 with the hubble space telescope. observations made on opposite sides of the disk show that one side is approaching us (the spectral lines are blueshifted by the doppler effect) while the other is receding (lines redshifted), a clear indication that the disk is rotating. the rotation speed is about 550 kilometers per second or 1.2 million miles per hour. such a high rotation speed is evidence that there is a very massive black hole at the center of m87.
(b) in 2019, the event horizon telescope, a collaborative venture among radio telescopes spanning our planet, was able to produce the first radio image of the shadow of the m87 black hole on the accretion disk surrounding it. this was taken with radio waves, so color is arbitrary. the shadow is about 2 ½ times as big as the event horizon of the supermassive black hole. (credit (a): modification of work by holland ford, stsci/jhu; richard harms, linda dressel, ajay k. kochhar, applied research corp.; zlatan tsvetanov, arthur davidsen, gerard kriss, johns hopkins; ralph bohlin, george hartig, stsci; bruce margon, university of washington in seattle; nasa; credit (b): modification of work by european southern observatory (eso), event horizon telescope collaboration) modern estimates show that there is a mass of at least 3.5 billion msun concentrated in a tiny region at the very center of m87. so much mass in such a small volume of space must be a black hole.
let’s stop for a moment and take in this figure: a single black hole that has swallowed enough material to make 3.5 billion stars like the sun. few astronomical measurements have ever led to so mind-boggling a result. what a strange environment the neighborhood of such a supermassive black hole must be. an international team of astronomers in 2019 made the first image of what the inner region of such a black hole, near the event horizon, looks like. they used the event horizon telescope, an array of radio telescopes in different countries, spanning planet earth, to observe m87. the signals from the many telescopes were sent to a central location and used to make a far more detailed radio-wave image than any single telescope can produce. figure 27.8b shows you that picture with artificial colors to help the eye. what you see as a black region in the middle is the shadow that the central black hole of m87 makes on its event horizon. another example is shown in figure 27.9. here, we see a disk of dust and gas that surrounds a 300-million-msun black hole in the center of an elliptical galaxy.
(the bright spot in the center is produced by the combined light of stars that have been pulled close together by the gravitational force of the black hole.) the mass of the black hole was again derived from measurements of the rotational speed of the disk. the gas in the disk is moving around at 155 kilometers per second at a distance of only 186 light-years from its center. given the pull of the mass at the center, we expect that the whole dust disk should be swallowed by the black hole in several billion years. 27.2 • supermassive black holes: what quasars really are 937 [image: astronomy_openstax_page955_img1.jpeg] figure 27.9 another galaxy with a black-hole disk. the ground-based image shows an elliptical galaxy called ngc 7052 located in the constellation of vulpecula, almost 200 million light-years from earth. at the galaxy’s center (right) is a dust disk roughly 3700 light-years in diameter. the disk rotates like a giant merry-go-round: gas in the inner part (186 light-years from the center) whirls around at a speed of 155 kilometers per second (341,000 miles per hour).