stellar convection occurs as currents of hot gas flow up and down through the star (figure 16.12). such currents travel at moderate speeds and do not upset the overall stability of the star. they don’t even result in a net transfer of mass either inward or outward because, as hot material rises, cool material falls and replaces it. this results in a convective circulation of rising and falling cells as seen in figure 16.12. in much the same way, heat from a fireplace can stir up air currents in a room, some rising and some falling, without driving any air into or out the room. convection currents carry heat very efficiently outward through a star. in the sun, convection turns out to be important in the central regions and near the surface. figure 16.12 convection. rising convection currents carry heat from the sun’s interior to its surface, whereas cooler material sinks downward. of course, nothing in a real star is as simple as diagrams in textbooks suggest. unless convection occurs, the only significant mode of energy transport through a star is by electromagnetic radiation.
radiation is not an efficient means of energy transport in stars because gases in stellar interiors are very opaque, that is, a photon does not go far (in the sun, typically about 0.01 meter) before it is absorbed. (the processes by which atoms and ions can interrupt the outward flow of photons—such as becoming ionized—were discussed in the section on the formation of spectral lines.) the absorbed energy is always reemitted, but it can be reemitted in any direction. a photon absorbed when traveling outward in a star has almost as good a chance of being radiated back toward the center of the star as toward its surface. a particular quantity of energy, therefore, zigzags around in an almost random manner and takes a long time to work its way from the center of a star to its surface (figure 16.13). estimates are somewhat uncertain, but in the sun, as we saw, the time required is probably between 100,000 and 1,000,000 years. if the photons were not absorbed and reemitted along the way, they would travel at the speed of light and could reach the surface in a little over 2 seconds, just as neutrinos do (figure 16.14).
558 16 • the sun: a nuclear powerhouse access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page576_img1.jpeg] figure 16.13 photons deep in the sun. a photon moving through the dense gases in the solar interior travels only a short distance before it interacts with one of the surrounding atoms. the resulting photon usually has a lower energy after each interaction and may then travel in any random direction. figure 16.14 photon and neutrino paths in the sun. (a) because photons generated by fusion reactions in the solar interior travel only a short distance before being absorbed or scattered by atoms and sent off in random directions, estimates are that it takes between 100,000 and 1,000,000 years for energy to make its way from the center of the sun to its surface. (b) in contrast, neutrinos do not interact with matter but traverse straight through the sun at the speed of light, reaching the surface in only a little more than 2 seconds. see this simulation of a photon’s random walk from the core of a star to its surface (https://openstax.org/l/ 30protonwalk) to learn more.
run the simulation several times and see how each photon takes a different amount of time to get out of the star. note that time is given in ma (mega annum), which means millions of years. heat transfer and cooking the three ways that heat energy moves from higher-temperature regions to cooler regions are all used in cooking, and this is important to all of us who enjoy making or eating food. link to learning making connections 16.3 • the solar interior: theory 559 [image: astronomy_openstax_page577_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page577_img2.jpeg] conduction is heat transfer by physical contact during which the energetic motion of particles in one region spread to other regions and even to adjacent objects in close contact. a tasty example of this is cooking a steak on a hot iron skillet. when a flame makes the bottom of a skillet hot, the particles in it vibrate actively and collide with neighboring particles, spreading the heat energy throughout the skillet (the ability to spread heat uniformly is a key criterion for selecting materials for cookware). a steak sitting on the surface of the skillet picks up heat energy by the particles in the surface of the skillet colliding with particles on the surface of the steak.