betelgeuse is a mere 10 million years old, which is relatively young compared with our sun’s 4.5 billion years, but it is already nearing its death throes as a red supergiant. figure 22.4 betelgeuse. betelgeuse is in the constellation orion, the hunter; in the right image, it is marked with a yellow “x” near the top left. in the left image, we see it in ultraviolet with the hubble space telescope, in the first direct image ever made of the surface of another star. as shown by the scale at the bottom, betelgeuse has an extended atmosphere so large that, if it were at the center of our solar system, it would stretch past the orbit of jupiter.
(credit: modification of work by andrea dupree (harvard- smithsonian cfa), ronald gilliland (stsci), nasa and esa) models for evolution to the giant stage as we discussed earlier, astronomers can construct computer models of stars with different masses and 746 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page764_img1.jpeg] compositions to see how stars change throughout their lives. figure 22.5, which is based on theoretical calculations by university of illinois astronomer icko iben, shows an h–r diagram with several tracks of evolution from the main sequence to the giant stage. tracks are shown for stars with different masses (from 0.5 to 15 times the mass of our sun) and with chemical compositions similar to that of the sun. the red line is the initial or zero-age main sequence. the numbers along the tracks indicate the time, in years, required for each star to reach those points in their evolution. once again, you can see that the more massive a star is, the more quickly it goes through each stage in its life. figure 22.5 evolutionary tracks of stars of different masses.
the solid black lines show the predicted evolution from the main sequence through the red giant or supergiant stage on the h–r diagram. each track is labeled with the mass of the star it is describing. the numbers show how many years each star takes to become a giant. the red line is the zero-age main sequence. while theorists debate the exact number of years shown here, our main point should be clear. the more massive the star, the shorter time it takes for each stage in its life. note that the most massive star in this diagram has a mass similar to that of betelgeuse, and so its evolutionary track shows approximately the history of betelgeuse. the track for a 1-solar-mass star shows that the sun is still in the main-sequence phase of evolution, since it is only about 4.5 billion years old. it will be billions of years before the sun begins its own “climb” away from the main sequence—the expansion of its outer layers that will make it a red giant. use the star in a box simulation (https://openstax.org/l/30starinbox) to explore the evolution of stars of different masses.
select the star’s mass, and then hit play to see how its luminosity, temperature, and size link to learning 22.1 • evolution from the main sequence to red giants 747 [image: astronomy_openstax_page765_img1.jpeg] change during its lifetime. 22.2 star clusters learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the preceding description of stellar evolution is based on calculations. however, no star completes its main- sequence lifetime or its evolution to a red giant quickly enough for us to observe these structural changes as they happen. fortunately, nature has provided us with an indirect way to test our calculations. instead of observing the evolution of a single star, we can look at a group or cluster of stars. we look for a group of stars that is very close together in space, held together by gravity, often moving around a common center. then it is reasonable to assume that the individual stars in the group all formed at nearly the same time, from the same cloud, and with the same composition. we expect that these stars will differ only in mass. and their masses determine how quickly they go through each stage of their lives.