certainly what we see hints at the existence of beings who are in advance of, not behind us, in the journey of life. lowell’s views captured the public imagination and inspired many novels and stories, the most famous of which was h. g. wells’ war of the worlds (1897). in this famous “invasion” novel, the thirsty inhabitants of a dying planet mars (based entirely on lowell’s ideas) come to conquer earth with advanced technology. although the lowell observatory first became famous for its work on the martian canals, both lowell and the observatory eventually turned to other projects as well. he became interested in the search for a ninth (and then undiscovered) planet in the solar system. in 1930, pluto was found at the lowell observatory, and it is not a coincidence that the name selected for the new planet starts with lowell’s initials. it was also at the lowell observatory that the first measurements were made of the great speed at which galaxies are moving away from us, observations that would ultimately lead to our modern view of an expanding universe. lowell (figure 10.5) continued to live at his observatory, marrying at age 53 and publishing extensively.
he relished the debate his claims about mars caused far more than the astronomers on the other side, who often complained that lowell’s work was making planetary astronomy a less respectable field. at the same time, the public fascination with the planets fueled by lowell’s work (and its interpreters) may, several generations later, have helped fan support for the space program and the many missions whose results grace the pages of our text. figure 10.5 percival lowell (1855–1916). this 1914 photograph shows percival lowell observing venus with his 24-inch telescope at flagstaff, arizona. in october 1938, the mercury theater of the air on radio dramatized the war of the worlds as a series of link to learning 10.1 • the nearest planets: an overview 325 [image: astronomy_openstax_page343_img1.jpeg] radio news reports. this broadcast (https://openstax.org/l/30warofworlds) scared many people into thinking that lowell’s martians were really invading new jersey, and caused something of a panic.
you can listen to the original radio broadcast if you scroll down to “war of the worlds.” rotation of the planets astronomers have determined the rotation period of mars with great accuracy by watching the motion of permanent surface markings; its sidereal day is 24 hours 37 minutes 23 seconds, just a little longer than the rotation period of earth. this high precision is not obtained by watching mars for a single rotation, but by noting how many turns it makes over a long period of time. good observations of mars date back more than 200 years, a period during which tens of thousands of martian days have passed. as a result, the rotation period can be calculated to within a few hundredths of a second. the rotational axis of mars has a tilt of about 25°, similar to the tilt of earth’s axis. thus, mars experiences seasons very much like those on earth. because of the longer martian year (almost two earth years), however, each season there lasts about six of our months. the situation with venus is different. since no surface detail can be seen through venus’ clouds, its rotation period can be found only by bouncing radar signals off the planet (as explained for mercury in the cratered worlds chapter).
the first radar observations of venus’ rotation were made in the early 1960s. later, topographical surface features were identified on the planet that showed up in the reflected radar signals. the rotation period of venus, precisely determined from the motion of such “radar features” across its disk, is 243 days. even more surprising than how long venus takes to rotate is the fact that it spins in a backward or retrograde direction (east to west). stop for a moment and think about how odd this slow rotation makes the calendar on venus. the planet takes 225 earth days to orbit the sun and 243 earth days to spin on its axis. so the day on venus (as defined by its spinning once) is longer than the year! as a result, the time the sun takes to return to the same place in venus’ sky—another way we might define the meaning of a day—turns out to be 117 earth days.