(in contrast, the air in the room where you are reading this book has roughly 1019 atoms per cm3.) the dust grains are even scarcer. a km3 of space would contain only a few hundred to a few thousand tiny grains, each typically less than one ten-thousandth of a millimeter in diameter. these numbers are just averages, however, because the gas and dust are distributed in a patchy and irregular way, much as water vapor in earth’s atmosphere is often concentrated into clouds. in some interstellar clouds, the density of gas and dust may exceed the average by as much as a thousand times or more, but even this density is more nearly a vacuum than any we can make on earth. to show what we mean, let’s imagine a vertical tube of air reaching from the ground to the top of earth’s atmosphere with a cross-section of 1 square meter. now let us extend the same-size tube from the top of the atmosphere all the way to the edge of the observable universe—over 10 billion light-years away. long though it is, the second tube would still contain fewer atoms than the one in our planet’s atmosphere.
while the density of interstellar matter is very low, the volume of space in which such matter is found is huge, and so its total mass is substantial. to see why, we must bear in mind that stars occupy only a tiny fraction of the volume of the milky way galaxy. for example, it takes light only about four seconds to travel a distance equal to the diameter of the sun, but more than four years to travel from the sun to the nearest star. even though the spaces among the stars are sparsely populated, there’s a lot of space out there! astronomers estimate that the total mass of gas and dust in the milky way galaxy is equal to about 15% of the mass contained in stars. this means that the mass of the interstellar matter in our galaxy amounts to about 10 billion times the mass of the sun. there is plenty of raw material in the galaxy to make generations of new stars and planets (and perhaps even astronomy students). e x a m p l e 2 0 . 1 estimating interstellar mass you can make a rough estimate of how much interstellar mass our galaxy contains and also how many new stars could be made from this interstellar matter.
all you need to know is how big the galaxy is and the average density using this formula: you have to remember to use consistent units—such as meters and kilograms. we will assume that our galaxy is shaped like a cylinder; the volume of a cylinder equals the area of its base times its height where is the radius of the cylinder and is its height. suppose that the average density of hydrogen gas in our galaxy is one atom per cm3. each hydrogen atom has a mass of 1.7 × 10−27 kg. if the galaxy is a cylinder with a diameter of 100,000 light-years and a height of 300 light-years, what is the mass of this gas? how many solar-mass stars (2.0 × 1030 kg) could be produced from this mass of gas if it were all turned into stars? solution if the diameter of the galaxy is 100,000 light-years, then the radius is 50,000 light-years.
recall that 1 light- year = 9.5 × 1012 km = 9.5 × 1017 cm, so the volume of the galaxy is 20.1 • the interstellar medium 669 the total mass is therefore this is sufficient to make stars equal in mass to the sun. that’s roughly 2 billion stars. check your learning you can use the same method to estimate the mass of interstellar gas around the sun. the distance from the sun to the nearest other star, proxima centauri, is 4.23 light-years. we will see in interstellar matter around the sun that the gas in the immediate vicinity of the sun is less dense than average, about 0.1 atoms per cm3. what is the total mass of interstellar hydrogen in a sphere centered on the sun and extending out to proxima centauri? how does this compare to the mass of the sun?