along with the l and t brown dwarfs already observed in our neighborhood, astronomers expect to find perhaps hundreds of additional t dwarfs and y dwarfs. many of these are likely to 1 the spectral types of stars were defined and discussed in analyzing starlight. 604 18 • the stars: a celestial census access for free at openstax.org be even cooler than the coolest currently known t dwarf. the reason the lowest-mass dwarfs are so hard to find is that they put out very little light—ten thousand to a million times less light than the sun. only recently has our technology progressed to the point that we can detect these dim, cool objects. figure 18.2 dwarf simulation. this computer simulation shows the stars in our neighborhood as they would be seen from a distance of 30 light-years away. the sun is in the center. all the brown dwarfs are circled; those found earlier are circled in blue, the ones found recently with the wise infrared telescope in space (whose scientists put this diagram together) are circled in red. the common m stars, which are red and faint, are made to look brighter than they really would be so that you can see them in the simulation.
note that luminous hot stars like our sun are very rare. (credit: modification of work by nasa/ jpl-caltech) to put all this in perspective, we note that even though the stars counted in the table are our closest neighbors, you can’t just look up at the night sky and see them without a telescope; stars fainter than the sun cannot be seen with the unaided eye unless they are very nearby. for example, stars with luminosities ranging from 1/100 to 1/10,000 the luminosity of the sun (lsun) are very common, but a star with a luminosity of 1/100 lsun would have to be within 5 light-years to be visible to the naked eye—and only three stars (all in one system) are this close to us. the nearest of these three stars, proxima centauri, still cannot be seen without a telescope because it has such a low luminosity. astronomers are working hard these days to complete the census of our local neighborhood by finding our faintest neighbors. recent discoveries of nearby stars have relied heavily upon infrared telescopes that are able to find these many cool, low-mass stars.
you should expect the number of known stars within 21 light- years of the sun to keep increasing as more and better surveys are undertaken. bright does not necessarily mean close if we confine our census to the local neighborhood, we will miss many of the most interesting kinds of stars. after all, the neighborhood in which you live does not contain all the types of people—distinguished according to age, education, income, race, and so on—that live in the entire country. for example, a few people do live to be over 100 years old, but there may be no such individual within several miles of where you live. in order to sample the full range of the human population, you would have to extend your census to a much larger area. similarly, some types of stars simply are not found nearby. a clue that we are missing something in our stellar census comes from the fact that only six of the 20 stars that appear brightest in our sky—sirius, vega, altair, alpha centauri, fomalhaut, and procyon—are found within 26 light-years of the sun (figure 18.3). why are we missing most of the brightest stars when we take our census of the local neighborhood?
18.1 • a stellar census 605 [image: astronomy_openstax_page623_img1.jpeg] figure 18.3 the closest stars. (a) this image, taken with a wide-angle telescope at the european southern observatory in chile, shows the system of three stars that is our nearest neighbor. (b) two bright stars that are close to each other (alpha centauri a and b) blend their light together. (c) indicated with an arrow (since you’d hardly notice it otherwise) is the much fainter proxima centauri star, which is spectral type m. (credit: modification of work by eso) the answer, interestingly enough, is that the stars that appear brightest are not the ones closest to us. the brightest stars look the way they do because they emit a very large amount of energy—so much, in fact, that they do not have to be nearby to look brilliant. you can confirm this by looking at appendix j, which gives distances for the 20 stars that appear brightest from earth. the most distant of these stars is more than 1000 light-years from us.