our study of the stars has demonstrated that the sun itself is a rather undistinguished star, halfway through its long main-sequence stage like so many billions of others. there seems nothing special about our position in the milky way galaxy either, and nothing surprising about our galaxy’s position in either its own group or its supercluster. the discovery of planets around other stars confirms our idea that the formation of planets is a natural consequence of the formation of stars. we have identified thousands of exoplanets—planets orbiting around other stars, from huge ones orbiting close to their stars (informally called “hot jupiters”) down to planets smaller than earth. a steady stream of exoplanet discoveries is leading to the conclusion that earthlike planets occur frequently—enough that there are likely many billions of “exo-earths” in our own milky way galaxy alone. from a planetary perspective, earth-size planets are not unusual. philosophers of science sometimes call the idea that there is nothing special about our place in the universe the copernican principle. given all of the above, most scientists would be surprised if life were limited to our planet and had started nowhere else.
there are billions of stars in our galaxy old enough for life to have developed on a planet around them, and there are billions of other galaxies as well. astronomers and 30.1 • the cosmic context for life 1057 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1075_img1.jpeg] biologists have long conjectured that a series of events similar to those on the early earth probably led to living organisms on many planets around other stars, and possibly even on other planets in our solar system, such as mars. the real scientific issue (which we do not currently know the answer to) is whether organic biochemistry is likely or unlikely in the universe at large. are we a fortunate and exceedingly rare outcome of chemical evolution, or is organic biochemistry a regular part of the chemical evolution of the cosmos? we do not yet know the answer to this question, but data, even an exceedingly small amount (like finding “unrelated to us” living systems on a world like europa), will help us arrive at it. so where are they? if the copernican principle is applied to life, then biology may be rather common among planets. taken to its logical limit, the copernican principle also suggests that intelligent life like us might be common.
intelligence like ours has some very special properties, including an ability to make progress through the application of technology. organic life around other (older) stars may have started a billion years earlier than we did on earth, so they may have had a lot more time to develop advanced technology such as sending information, probes, or even life-forms between stars. faced with such a prospect, physicist enrico fermi asked a question several decades ago that is now called the fermi paradox: where are they? if life and intelligence are common and have such tremendous capacity for growth, why is there not a network of galactic civilizations whose presence extends even into a “latecomer” planetary system like ours? several solutions have been suggested to the fermi paradox. perhaps life is common but intelligence (or at least technological civilization) is rare. perhaps such a network will come about in the future but has not yet had the time to develop. maybe there are invisible streams of data flowing past us all the time that we are not advanced enough or sensitive enough to detect. maybe advanced species make it a practice not to interfere with immature, developing consciousness such as our own.
or perhaps civilizations that reach a certain level of technology then self-destruct, meaning there are no other civilizations now existing in our galaxy. we do not yet know whether any advanced life is out there and, if it is, why we are not aware of it. still, you might want to keep these issues in mind as you read the rest of this chapter. is there a network of galactic civilizations beyond our solar system? if so, why can’t we see them? explore the possibilities in the cartoon video (https://openstax.org/l/30fermparadox) “the fermi paradox—where are all the aliens?” 30.2 astrobiology learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: scientists today take a multidisciplinary approach to studying the origin, evolution, distribution, and ultimate fate of life in the universe; this field of study is known as astrobiology.