one reason this discovery could be important is that it raises the possibility of future human habitation near the lunar poles, or even of a lunar base as a way-station on routes to mars and the rest of the solar system. if the ice could be mined, it would yield both water and oxygen for human support, and it could be broken down into hydrogen and oxygen, a potent rocket fuel. 9.2 the lunar surface learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: general appearance if you look at the moon through a telescope, you can see that it is covered by impact craters of all sizes. the most conspicuous of the moon’s surface features—those that can be seen with the unaided eye and that make up the feature often called “the man in the moon”—are vast splotches of darker lava flows. centuries ago, early lunar observers thought that the moon had continents and oceans and that it was a possible abode of life. they called the dark areas “seas” (maria in latin, or mare in the singular, pronounced “mah ray”).
their names, mare nubium (sea of clouds), mare tranquillitatis (sea of tranquility), and so on, are still in use today. in contrast, the “land” areas between the seas are not named. thousands of individual craters differentiate between the major surface features of the moon describe the history of the lunar surface describe the properties of the lunar “soil” 9.2 • the lunar surface 295 have been named, however, mostly for great scientists and philosophers (figure 9.6). among the most prominent craters are those named for plato, copernicus, tycho, and kepler. galileo only has a small crater, however, reflecting his low standing among the vatican scientists who made some of the first lunar maps. we know today that the resemblance of lunar features to terrestrial ones is superficial. even when they look somewhat similar, the origins of lunar features such as craters and mountains are very different from their terrestrial counterparts. the moon’s relative lack of internal activity, together with the absence of air and water, make most of its geological history unlike anything we know on earth.
figure 9.6 sunrise on the central mountain peaks of tycho crater, as imaged by the nasa lunar reconnaissance orbiter. tycho, about 82 kilometers in diameter, is one of the youngest of the very large lunar craters. the central mountain rises 2 kilometers above the crater floor. (credit: modification of work by nasa/goddard/arizona state university) lunar history to trace the detailed history of the moon or of any planet, we must be able to estimate the ages of individual rocks. once lunar samples were brought back by the apollo astronauts, the radioactive dating techniques that had been developed for earth were applied to them. the solidification ages of the samples ranged from about 3.3 to 4.4 billion years old, substantially older than most of the rocks on earth. for comparison, as we saw in the chapter on earth, moon, and sky, both earth and the moon were formed between 4.5 and 4.6 billion years ago. most of the crust of the moon (83%) consists of silicate rocks called anorthosites; these regions are known as the lunar highlands.
they are made of relatively low-density rock that solidified on the cooling moon like slag floating on the top of a smelter. because they formed so early in lunar history (between 4.1 and 4.4 billion years ago), the highlands are also extremely heavily cratered, bearing the scars of all those billions of years of impacts by interplanetary debris (figure 9.7). 296 9 • cratered worlds access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page314_img1.jpeg] figure 9.7 lunar highlands. the old, heavily cratered lunar highlands make up 83% of the moon’s surface. (credit: apollo 11 crew, nasa) unlike the mountains on earth, the moon’s highlands do not have any sharp folds in their ranges. the highlands have low, rounded profiles that resemble the oldest, most eroded mountains on earth (figure 9.8). because there is no atmosphere or water on the moon, there has been no wind, water, or ice to carve them into cliffs and sharp peaks, the way we have seen them shaped on earth. their smooth features are attributed to gradual erosion, mostly due to impact cratering.