for example, the milky way somewhat resembles the andromeda galaxy, which, at a distance of about 2.3 million light-years, is our nearest neighboring giant spiral galaxy. just as you can get a much better picture of yourself if someone else takes the photo from a distance away, pictures and other diagnostic observations of nearby galaxies that resemble ours have been vital to our understanding of the properties of the milky way. 868 25 • the milky way galaxy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page886_img1.jpeg] start this video (https://openstax.org/l/30gaiastars), then click-and-drag to look in all directions from earth in the gaia space telescope’s visualization of the stars of our galaxy. the milky way viewer (https://openstax.org/l/30milkywayview) allows you to move to different locations in the milky way (using the move and zoom buttons) and view different stellar populations. the milky way galaxy in myth and legend to most of us living in the twenty-first century, the milky way galaxy is an elusive sight.
we must make an effort to leave our well-lit homes and streets and venture beyond our cities and suburbs into less populated environments. once the light pollution subsides to negligible levels, the milky way can be readily spotted arching over the sky on clear, moonless nights. the milky way is especially bright in late summer and early fall in the northern hemisphere. some of the best places to view the milky way are in our national and state parks, where residential and industrial developments have been kept to a minimum. some of these parks host special sky-gazing events that are definitely worth checking out—especially during the two weeks surrounding the new moon, when the faint stars and milky way don’t have to compete with the moon’s brilliance. go back a few centuries, and these starlit sights would have been the norm rather than the exception. before the advent of electric or even gas lighting, people relied on short-lived fires to illuminate their homes and byways. consequently, their night skies were typically much darker. confronted by myriad stellar patterns and the milky way’s gauzy band of diffuse light, people of all cultures developed myths to make sense of it all.
some of the oldest myths relating to the milky way are maintained by the aboriginal australians through their rock painting and storytelling. these legacies are thought to go back tens of thousands of years, to when the aboriginal people were being “dreamed” along with the rest of the cosmos. the milky way played a central role as an arbiter of the creation. taking the form of a great serpent, it joined with the earth serpent to dream and thus create all the creatures on earth. the ancient greeks viewed the milky way as a spray of milk that spilled from the breast of the goddess hera. in this legend, zeus had secretly placed his infant son heracles at hera’s breast while she was asleep in order to give his half-human son immortal powers. when hera awoke and found heracles suckling, she pushed him away, causing her milk to spray forth into the cosmos (figure 25.9). the dynastic chinese regarded the milky way as a “silver river” that was made to separate two star-crossed lovers. to the east of the milky way, zhi nu, the weaving maiden, was identified with the bright star vega in the constellation of lyra the harp.
to the west of the milky way, her lover niu lang, the cowherd, was associated with the star altair in the constellation of aquila the eagle. they had been exiled on opposite sides of the milky way by zhi nu’s mother, the queen of heaven, after she heard of their secret marriage and the birth of their two children. however, once a year, they are permitted to reunite. on the seventh day of the seventh lunar month (which typically occurs in our month of august), they would meet on a bridge over the milky way that thousands of magpies had made (figure 25.9). this romantic time continues to be celebrated today as qi xi, meaning “double seventh,” with couples reenacting the cosmic reunion of zhi nu link to learning making connections 25.1 • the architecture of the galaxy 869 and niu lang. figure 25.9 the milky way in myth. (a) origin of the milky way by jacopo tintoretto (circa 1575) illustrates the greek myth that explains the formation of the milky way.