as far as we know, a giant planet cannot be formed without the condensation of water ice, and water ice is not stable so close to the heat of a star. it seems likely that all the giant planets, “hot” or “normal,” formed at a distance of several astronomical units from the star, but we now see that they did not necessarily stay there. this discovery has led to a revision in our understanding of planet formation that now includes “planet migrations” within the protoplanetary disk, or later gravitational encounters between sibling planets that scatter one of the planets inward. many exoplanets have large orbital eccentricity (recall this means the orbits are not circular). high eccentricities were not expected for planets that form in a disk. this discovery provides further support for the scattering of planets when they interact gravitationally. when planets change each other’s motions, their orbits could become much more eccentric than the ones with which they began. there are several suggestions for ways migration might have occurred. most involve interactions between the giant planets and the remnant material in the circumstellar disk from which they formed. these interactions would have taken place when the system was very young, while material still remained in the disk.
in such cases, the planet travels at a faster velocity than the gas and dust and feels a kind of “headwind” (or friction) that causes it to lose energy and spiral inward. it is still unclear how the spiraling planet stops before it plunges into the star. our best guess is that this plunge into the star is the fate for many protoplanets; however, clearly some migrating planets can stop their inward motions and escape this destruction, since we find hot jupiters in many mature planetary systems. 14.5 planetary evolution learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: while we await more discoveries and better understanding of other planetary systems, let us look again at the early history of our own solar system, after the dissipation of our dust disk.
the era of giant impacts was describe the geological activity during the evolution of the planets, particularly on the terrestrial planets describe the factors that affect differences in elevation on the terrestrial planets explain how the differences in atmosphere on venus, earth, and mars evolved from similar starting points in the early history of the solar system 496 14 • cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system access for free at openstax.org probably confined to the first 100 million years of solar system history, ending by about 4.4 billion years ago. shortly thereafter, the planets cooled and began to assume their present aspects. up until about 4 billion years ago, they continued to acquire volatile materials, and their surfaces were heavily cratered from the remaining debris that hit them. however, as external influences declined, all the terrestrial planets as well as the moons of the outer planets began to follow their own evolutionary courses. the nature of this evolution depended on each object’s composition, mass, and distance from the sun. geological activity we have seen a wide range in the level of geological activity on the terrestrial planets and icy moons.
internal sources of such activity (as opposed to pummeling from above) require energy, either in the form of primordial heat left over from the formation of a planet or from the decay of radioactive elements in the interior. the larger the planet or moon, the more likely it is to retain its internal heat and the more slowly it cools—this is the “baked potato effect” mentioned in other worlds: an introduction to the solar system. therefore, we are more likely to see evidence of continuing geological activity on the surface of larger (solid) worlds (figure 14.18). jupiter’s moon io is an interesting exception to this rule; we saw that it has an unusual source of heat from the gravitational flexing of its interior by the tidal pull of jupiter. europa is probably also heated by jovian tides. saturn may be having a similar effect on its moon enceladus. figure 14.18 stages in the geological history of a terrestrial planet. in this image, time increases downward along the left side, where the stages are described. each planet is shown roughly in its present stage. the smaller the planet, the more quickly it passes through these stages.