he wrote a pamphlet called science from shipboard for men and women in the armed services who had to spend many weeks on board transport ships to europe. and during the difficult period of the 1950s, when congressional committees began their “witch hunts” for communist sympathizers (including such liberal leaders as shapley), he spoke out forcefully and fearlessly in defense of the freedom of thought and expression. a man of many interests, he was fascinated by the behavior of ants, and wrote scientific papers about them as well as about galaxies. by the time he died in 1972, shapley was acknowledged as one of the pivotal figures of modern astronomy, a “twentieth-century copernicus” who mapped the milky way and showed us our place in the galaxy. to find more information about shapley’s life and work (https://openstax.org/l/30shapbrumed), see the entry for him on the bruce medalists website.
(this site features the winners of the bruce medal of the astronomical society of the pacific, one of the highest honors in astronomy; the list is a who’s who of some of the greatest astronomers of the last twelve decades.) disks and haloes with modern instruments, astronomers can now penetrate the “smog” of the milky way by studying radio and infrared emissions from distant parts of the galaxy. measurements at these wavelengths (as well as observations of other galaxies like ours) have given us a good idea of what the milky way would look like if we could observe it from a distance. figure 25.5 sketches what we would see if we could view the galaxy face-on and edge-on. the brightest part of the galaxy consists of a thin, circular, rotating disk of stars distributed across a region about 100,000 light- years in diameter and about 2000 light-years thick. (given how thin the disk is, perhaps a cd is a more appropriate analogy than a wheel.) the very youngest stars, and the dust and gas from which stars form, are found typically within 100 light-years of the plane of the milky way galaxy. the mass of the interstellar matter is about 15% of the mass of the stars in this disk.
link to learning 25.1 • the architecture of the galaxy 865 figure 25.5 schematic representation of the galaxy. the left image shows the face-on view of the spiral disk; the right image shows the view looking edge-on along the disk. the major spiral arms are labeled. the sun is located on the inside edge of the smaller arm (or spur) called the orion-cygnus arm. as the diagram in figure 25.5 shows, the stars, gas, and dust are not spread evenly throughout the disk but are concentrated into a central bar and a series of spiral arms. recent infrared observations have confirmed that the central bar is composed mostly of old yellow-red stars. the two main spiral arms appear to connect with the ends of the bar. they are highlighted by the blue light from young hot stars. we know many other spiral galaxies that also have bar-shaped concentrations of stars in their central regions; for that reason they are called barred spirals. figure 25.6 shows two other galaxies—one without a bar and one with a strong bar—to give you a basis for comparison to our own. we will describe our spiral structure in more detail shortly.
the sun is located about halfway between the center of the galaxy and the edge of the disk and only about 70 light-years above its central plane. figure 25.6 unbarred and barred spiral galaxies. (a) this image shows the unbarred spiral galaxy m74. it contains a small central bulge of mostly old yellow-red stars, along with spiral arms that are highlighted with the blue light from young hot stars. (b) this 866 25 • the milky way galaxy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page884_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page884_img2.jpeg] image shows the strongly barred spiral galaxy ngc 1365. the bulge and the fainter bar both appear yellowish because the brightest stars in them are mostly old yellow and red giants. two main spiral arms project from the ends of the bar. as in m74, these spiral arms are populated with blue stars and red patches of glowing gas—hallmarks of recent star formation. the milky way galaxy is thought to have a barred spiral structure that is intermediate between these two examples. (credit a: modification of work by eso/ pessto/s.