what happens to the image produced by a lens if the lens is “stopped down” (the aperture reduced, thereby reducing the amount of light passing through the lens) with an iris diaphragm—a device that covers its periphery? 19. what would be the properties of an ideal astronomical detector? how closely do the actual properties of a ccd approach this ideal? 6 • exercises 221 20. many decades ago, the astronomers on the staff of mount wilson and palomar observatories each received about 60 nights per year for their observing programs. today, an astronomer feels fortunate to get 10 nights per year on a large telescope. can you suggest some reasons for this change? 21. the largest observatory complex in the world is on maunakea, the tallest mountain on earth. what are some factors astronomers consider when selecting an observatory site? don’t forget practical ones. should astronomers, for example, consider building an observatory on denali (mount mckinley) or mount everest? 22. suppose you are looking for sites for a visible-light observatory, an infrared observatory, and a radio observatory. what are the main criteria of excellence for each?
what sites are actually considered the best today? 23. radio astronomy involves wavelengths much longer than those of visible light, and many orbiting observatories have probed the universe for radiation of very short wavelengths. what sorts of objects and physical conditions would you expect to be associated with emission of radiation at very long and very short wavelengths? 24. the dean of a university located near the ocean (who was not a science major in college) proposes building an infrared telescope right on campus and operating it in a nice heated dome so that astronomers will be comfortable on cold winter nights. criticize this proposal, giving your reasoning. figuring for yourself 25. what is the area, in square meters, of a 10-m telescope? 26. approximately 9000 stars are visible to the naked eye in the whole sky (imagine that you could see around the entire globe and both the northern and southern hemispheres), and there are about 41,200 square degrees on the sky. how many stars are visible per square degree? per square arcsecond? 27. theoretically (that is, if seeing were not an issue), the resolution of a telescope is inversely proportional to its diameter.
how much better is the resolution of the alma when operating at its longest baseline than the resolution of the arecibo telescope? 28. in broad daylight, the size of your pupil is typically 3 mm. in dark situations, it expands to about 7 mm. how much more light can it gather? 29. how much more light can be gathered by a telescope that is 8 m in diameter than by your fully dark- adapted eye at 7 mm? 30. how much more light can the keck telescope (with its 10-m diameter mirror) gather than an amateur telescope whose mirror is 25 cm (0.25 m) across? 31. people are often bothered when they discover that reflecting telescopes have a second mirror in the middle to bring the light out to an accessible focus where big instruments can be mounted. “don’t you lose light?” people ask. well, yes, you do, but there is no better alternative. you can estimate how much light is lost by such an arrangement. the primary mirror (the one at the bottom in figure 6.6) of the gemini north telescope is 8 m in diameter. the secondary mirror at the top is about 1 m in diameter.
use the formula for the area of a circle to estimate what fraction of the light is blocked by the secondary mirror. 32. telescopes can now be operated remotely from a warm room, but until about 25 years ago, astronomers worked at the telescope to guide it so that it remained pointed in exactly the right place. in a large telescope, like the palomar 200-inch telescope, astronomers sat in a cage at the top of the telescope, where the secondary mirror is located, as shown in figure 6.6. assume for the purpose of your calculation that the diameter of this cage was 40 inches. what fraction of the light is blocked? 222 6 • exercises access for free at openstax.org 33. the hst cost about $1.7 billion for construction and $300 million for its shuttle launch, and it costs $250 million per year to operate. if the telescope lasts for 20 years, what is the total cost per year? per day? if the telescope can be used just 30% of the time for actual observations, what is the cost per hour and per minute for the astronomer’s observing time on this instrument? what is the cost per person in the united states?