surface temperature on venus the high surface temperature of venus was discovered by radio astronomers in the late 1950s and confirmed 10.3 • the massive atmosphere of venus 333 [image: astronomy_openstax_page351_img1.jpeg] by the mariner and venera probes. how can our neighbor planet be so hot? although venus is somewhat closer to the sun than is earth, its surface is hundreds of degrees hotter than you would expect from the extra sunlight it receives. scientists wondered what could be heating the surface of venus to a temperature above 700 k. the answer turned out to be the greenhouse effect. the greenhouse effect works on venus just as it does on earth, but since venus has so much more co2—almost a million times more—the effect is much stronger. the thick co2 acts as a blanket, making it very difficult for the infrared (heat) radiation from the ground to get back into space. as a result, the surface heats up. the energy balance is only restored when the planet is radiating as much energy as it receives from the sun, but this can happen only when the temperature of the lower atmosphere is very high.
one way of thinking of greenhouse heating is that it must raise the surface temperature of venus until this energy balance is achieved. has venus always had such a massive atmosphere and high surface temperature, or might it have evolved to such conditions from a climate that was once more nearly earthlike? the answer to this question is of particular interest to us as we look at the increasing levels of co2 in earth’s atmosphere. as the greenhouse effect becomes stronger on earth, are we in any danger of transforming our own planet into a hellish place like venus? let us try to reconstruct the possible evolution of venus from an earthlike beginning to its present state. venus may once have had a climate similar to that of earth, with moderate temperatures, water oceans, and much of its co2 dissolved in the ocean or chemically combined with the surface rocks. then we allow for modest additional heating—by gradual increase in the energy output of the sun, for example. when we calculate how venus’ atmosphere would respond to such effects, it turns out that even a small amount of extra heat can lead to increased evaporation of water from the oceans and the release of gas from surface rocks.
this in turn means a further increase in the atmospheric co2 and h2o, gases that would amplify the greenhouse effect in venus’ atmosphere. that would lead to still more heat near venus’ surface and the release of further co2 and h2o. unless some other processes intervene, the temperature thus continues to rise. such a situation is called the runaway greenhouse effect. we want to emphasize that the runaway greenhouse effect is not just a large greenhouse effect; it is an evolutionary process. the atmosphere evolves from having a small greenhouse effect, such as on earth, to a situation where greenhouse warming is a major factor, as we see today on venus. once the large greenhouse conditions develop, the planet establishes a new, much hotter equilibrium near its surface. reversing the situation is difficult because of the role water plays. on earth, most of the co2 is either chemically bound in the rocks of our crust or dissolved by the water in our oceans. as venus got hotter and hotter, its oceans evaporated, eliminating that safety valve. but the water vapor in the planet’s atmosphere will not last forever in the presence of ultraviolet light from the sun.
the light element hydrogen can escape from the atmosphere, leaving the oxygen behind to combine chemically with surface rock. the loss of water is therefore an irreversible process: once the water is gone, it cannot be restored. there is evidence that this is just what happened to the water once present on venus. we don’t know if the same runaway greenhouse effect could one day happen on earth. although we are uncertain about the point at which a stable greenhouse effect breaks down and turns into a runaway greenhouse effect, venus stands as clear testament to the fact that a planet cannot continue heating indefinitely without a major change in its oceans and atmosphere. it is a conclusion that we and our descendants will surely want to pay close attention to. 334 10 • earthlike planets: venus and mars access for free at openstax.org 10.4 the geology of mars learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: mars is more interesting to most people than venus because it is more hospitable. even from the distance of earth, we can see surface features on mars and follow the seasonal changes in its polar caps (figure 10.13).