the cosmic microwave background radiation that we see today in the radio spectrum is the signature of those photons from the time when the universe became transparent to them. the universe was a little less than 378,000 years old, and photons that were infrared were finally able to travel freely throughout the universe. as the universe expanded, these photons were redshifted into the top of the radio spectrum and are the cosmic microwave background radiation we see today. primordial deuterium abundance if scientists are able to determine the density of deuterium in the universe, then they will be able to determine the density of matter in the universe and its relationship to the critical density. as deuterium is created in stars, it is immediately and completely consumed in the creation of helium. but in primordial dust clouds – those clouds not changed by the explosions of aging stars, and those clouds composed of hydrogen, helium, and deuterium from the big bang – the abundance of deuterium is unchanged from the big bang.
astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 361 figure 439: the hubble ultra deep field component 180 – the galactic epoch as atoms became stable, they were able to collapse into stars, and in the young universe those stars clumped together into primitive galaxies. this was the start of the galactic epoch, it is approximately 200 million years after the big bang. there is a question that astronomers have not resolved, and that is, did the galaxies come first and then the supermassive black holes? or did the black holes come first? one possibility is that the supermassive black holes formed as a result of massive galaxies of stars forming first. it is likely that supermassive black holes, and the radiation emitted in jets from their accretion disks, would likely have a negative effect in the early formation of the galaxies, and it seems reasonable that the black holes would form as myriads of stars migrate to the center of the fledgling galaxies. bottom line? it is likely that they formed together. every speck of light in figure 439: the hubble ultra deep field image, is an early galaxy. the image reflects the universe when it was only approximately 4 billion years old.
these would not have been the galaxies as they first appeared, but would be representative of the galaxies as they apppeared at the end of the galactic epoch: the end of new galaxy formation. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page361_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 362 component 181 – the stellar epoch by 3 billion years after the big bang galaxies had stopped forming from the primordial dust and gas. stars continued to form in the existing galaxies, and we entered the stellar epoch. this is the epoch that we are in today. galaxies continue to evolve through mergers, but the creation of galaxies from dust has ceased. this epoch also continues through the threshhold from the matter dominated era into the dark energy dominated era. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 363 figure 440: dark matter clumping in the milky way component 182 – dark matter and structure current theories about the big bang imply that dark matter condensed out early. at this time, energy levels were too high for the stable creation of normal matter. but dark matter, since it does not interact much with normal matter, was able to survive.
this dark matter then would clump and form structures before the normal matter could. these clumps of dark matter were focal points for the formation of structures of normal matter. this enabled the normal matter to form into the structures we see today more quickly than they would have been able to do without the dark matter. in fact, without the dark matter’s head-start, we would not now be able to see the galaxies and other structures that we see in the universe today. this would also correlate with the dark matter concentrations that we detect in the neighborhood of galaxies and galaxy clusters. figure 440 shows a map of dark matter as seen from earth. as you move from left to right, you are moving further away from earth, and therefore moving backwards in time. the map clearly shows that as time has progressed, the clumps have become more well defined. this image was developed based on data from the hubble space telescope cosmos survey. the data was determined from measurements of weak gravitational lensing.