most objects of interest to astronomers are extremely faint: the more light we can collect, the better we can study such objects. (and remember, even though we are focusing on visible light first, there are many telescopes that collect other kinds of electromagnetic radiation.) telescopes that collect visible radiation use a lens or mirror to gather the light. other types of telescopes may use collecting devices that look very different from the lenses and mirrors with which we are familiar, but they serve the same function. in all types of telescopes, the light-gathering ability is determined by the area of the device acting as the light-gathering “bucket.” since most telescopes have mirrors or lenses, we can compare their light-gathering power by comparing the apertures, or diameters, of the opening through which light travels or reflects. the amount of light a telescope can collect increases with the size of the aperture. a telescope with a mirror that is 4 meters in diameter can collect 16 times as much light as a telescope that is 1 meter in diameter.
(the diameter is squared because the area of a circle equals , where d is the diameter of the circle.) 6.1 • telescopes 183 [image: astronomy_openstax_page201_img1.jpeg] e x a m p l e 6 . 1 calculating the light-collecting area what is the area of a 1-m diameter telescope? a 4-m diameter one? solution using the equation for the area of a circle, the area of a 1-m telescope is and the area of a 4-m telescope is check your learning show that the ratio of the two areas is 16:1. answer: therefore, with 16 times the area, a 4-m telescope collects 16 times the light of a 1-m telescope. after the telescope forms an image, we need some way to detect and record it so that we can measure, reproduce, and analyze the image in various ways. before the nineteenth century, astronomers simply viewed images with their eyes and wrote descriptions of what they saw. this was very inefficient and did not lead to a very reliable long-term record; you know from crime shows on television that eyewitness accounts are often inaccurate. in the nineteenth century, the use of photography became widespread.
in those days, photographs were a chemical record of an image on a specially treated glass plate. today, the image is generally detected with sensors similar to those in digital cameras, recorded electronically, and stored in computers. this permanent record can then be used for detailed and quantitative studies. professional astronomers rarely look through the large telescopes that they use for their research. formation of an image by a lens or a mirror whether or not you wear glasses, you see the world through lenses; they are key elements of your eyes. a lens is a transparent piece of material that bends the rays of light passing through it. if the light rays are parallel as they enter, the lens brings them together in one place to form an image (figure 6.4). if the curvatures of the lens surfaces are just right, all parallel rays of light (say, from a star) are bent, or refracted, in such a way that they converge toward a point, called the focus of the lens. at the focus, an image of the light source appears. in the case of parallel light rays, the distance from the lens to the location where the light rays focus, or image, behind the lens is called the focal length of the lens.
184 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org figure 6.4 formation of an image by a simple lens. parallel rays from a distant source are bent by the convex lens so that they all come together in a single place (the focus) to form an image. as you look at figure 6.4, you may ask why two rays of light from the same star would be parallel to each other. after all, if you draw a picture of star shining in all directions, the rays of light coming from the star don’t look parallel at all. but remember that the stars (and other astronomical objects) are all extremely far away. by the time the few rays of light pointed toward us actually arrive at earth, they are, for all practical purposes, parallel to each other. put another way, any rays that were not parallel to the ones pointed at earth are now heading in some very different direction in the universe. to view the image formed by the lens in a telescope, we use an additional lens called an eyepiece. the eyepiece focuses the image at a distance that is either directly viewable by a human or at a convenient place for a detector.