9.2 • the lunar surface 299 [image: astronomy_openstax_page317_img1.jpeg] figure 9.12 footprint on moon dust. apollo photo of an astronaut’s boot print in the lunar soil. (credit: nasa) in the absence of any air, the lunar surface experiences much greater temperature extremes than the surface of earth, even though earth is virtually the same distance from the sun. near local noon, when the sun is highest in the sky, the temperature of the dark lunar soil rises above the boiling point of water. during the long lunar night (which, like the lunar day, lasts two earth weeks1 ), the temperature drops to about 100 k (–173 °c). the extreme cooling is a result not only of the absence of air but also of the porous nature of the moon’s dusty soil, which cools more rapidly than solid rock would. learn how the moon’s craters and maria were formed by watching a video produced by nasa’s lunar reconnaissance orbiter (lro) team (https://openstax.org/l/30mooncratersfo) about the evolution of the moon, tracing it from its origin about 4.5 billion years ago to the moon we see today.
see a simulation of how the moon’s craters and maria were formed through periods of impact, volcanic activity, and heavy bombardment. 9.3 impact craters learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: volcanic versus impact origin of craters the moon provides an important benchmark for understanding the history of our planetary system. most solid worlds show the effects of impacts, often extending back to the era when a great deal of debris from our system’s formation process was still present. on earth, this long history has been erased by our active geology. on the moon, in contrast, most of the impact history is preserved. if we can understand what has happened on the moon, we may be able to apply this knowledge to other worlds. the moon is especially interesting because it is not just any moon, but our moon—a nearby world that has shared the history of earth for more link to learning compare and contrast ideas about how lunar craters form explain the process of impact crater formation discuss the use of crater counts to determine relative ages of lunar landforms 1 you can see the cycle of day and night on the side of the moon facing us in the form of the moon’s phases.
it takes about 14 days for the side of the moon facing us to go from full moon (all lit up) to new moon (all dark). there is more on this in chapter 4: earth, moon, and sky. 300 9 • cratered worlds access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page318_img1.jpeg] than 4 billion years and preserved a record that, for earth, has been destroyed by our active geology. until the middle of the twentieth century, scientists did not generally recognize that lunar craters were the result of impacts. since impact craters are extremely rare on earth, geologists did not expect them to be the major feature of lunar geology. they reasoned (perhaps unconsciously) that since the craters we have on earth are volcanic, the lunar craters must have a similar origin. one of the first geologists to propose that lunar craters were the result of impacts was grove k. gilbert, a scientist with the us geological survey in the 1890s.
he pointed out that the large lunar craters—mountain- rimmed, circular features with floors generally below the level of the surrounding plains—are larger and have different shapes from known volcanic craters on earth. terrestrial volcanic craters are smaller and deeper and almost always occur at the tops of volcanic mountains (figure 9.13). the only alternative to explain the moon’s craters was an impact origin. his careful reasoning, although not accepted at the time, laid the foundations for the modern science of lunar geology. figure 9.13 volcanic and impact craters. profiles of a typical terrestrial volcanic crater and a typical lunar impact crater are quite different. gilbert concluded that the lunar craters were produced by impacts, but he didn’t understand why all of them were circular and not oval. the reason lies in the escape velocity, the minimum speed that a body must reach to permanently break away from the gravity of another body; it is also the minimum speed that a projectile approaching earth or the moon will hit with. attracted by the gravity of the larger body, the incoming chunk strikes with at least escape velocity, which is 11 kilometers per second for earth and 2.4 kilometers per second (5400 miles per hour) for the moon.