levay (stsci)) general relativity predicts that the light from a distant object may also be amplified by the lensing effect, thereby making otherwise invisible objects bright enough to detect. this is particularly useful for probing the earliest stages of galaxy formation, when the universe was young. figure 28.19 shows an example of a very distant faint galaxy that we can study in detail only because its light path passes through a large 976 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page994_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page994_img2.jpeg] concentration of massive galaxies and we now see a brighter image of it. figure 28.19 distorted images of a distant galaxy produced by gravitational lensing in a galaxy cluster. the rounded outlines show the location of distinct, distorted images of the background galaxy resulting from lensing by the mass in the cluster. the image in the box at lower left is a reconstruction of what the lensed galaxy would look like in the absence of the cluster, based on a model of the cluster’s mass distribution, which can be derived from studying the distorted galaxy images.
the reconstruction shows far more detail about the galaxy than could have been seen in the absence of lensing. as the image shows, this galaxy contains regions of star formation glowing like bright christmas tree bulbs. these are much brighter than any star- formation regions in our milky way galaxy. (credit: modification of work by nasa, esa, and z. levay (stsci)) we should note that the visible mass in a galaxy is not the only possible gravitational lens. dark matter can also reveal itself by producing this effect. astronomers are using lensed images from all over the sky to learn more about where dark matter is located and how much of it exists. you can use the gravitational lensing simulator (https://openstax.org/l/30gravitlensing) to explore how the distance and mass of a cluster of galaxies affects the offset of lensed images of a very distant galaxy. instructions are available by clicking on help. link to learning 28.3 • the distribution of galaxies in space 977 [image: astronomy_openstax_page995_img1.jpeg] superclusters and voids after astronomers discovered clusters of galaxies, they naturally wondered whether there were still larger structures in the universe. do clusters of galaxies gather together?
to answer this question, we must be able to map large parts of the universe in three dimensions. we must know not only the position of each galaxy on the sky (that’s two dimensions) but also its distance from us (the third dimension). this means we must be able to measure the redshift of each galaxy in our map. taking a spectrum of each individual galaxy to do this is a much more time-consuming task than simply counting galaxies seen in different directions on the sky, as hubble did. today, astronomers have found ways to get the spectra of many galaxies in the same field of view (sometimes hundreds or even thousands at a time) to cut down the time it takes to finish their three-dimensional maps. larger telescopes are also able to measure the redshifts—and therefore the distances—of much more distant galaxies and (again) to do so much more quickly than previously possible. another challenge astronomers faced in deciding how to go about constructing a map of the universe is similar to that confronted by the first team of explorers in a huge, uncharted territory on earth. since there is only one band of explorers and an enormous amount of land, they have to make choices about where to go first.
one strategy might be to strike out in a straight line in order to get a sense of the terrain. they might, for example, cross some mostly empty prairies and then hit a dense forest. as they make their way through the forest, they learn how thick it is in the direction they are traveling, but not its width to their left or right. then a river crosses their path; as they wade across, they can measure its width but learn nothing about its length. still, as they go on in their straight line, they begin to get some sense of what the landscape is like and can make at least part of a map. other explorers, striking out in other directions, will someday help fill in the remaining parts of that map. astronomers have traditionally had to make the same sort of choices. we cannot explore the universe in every direction to infinite “depth” or sensitivity: there are far too many galaxies and far too few telescopes to do the job. but we can pick a single direction or a small slice of the sky and start mapping the galaxies.