we really can’t give an answer without first explaining the model of the universe we are assuming in calculating it (by which time a reporter or student is long gone or asleep). specifically, we must use a model that includes the change in the expansion rate with time. the key ingredients of the model are the amounts of matter, including dark matter, and the equivalent mass (according to e = mc2) of the dark energy along with the hubble constant. elsewhere in this book, we have estimated the mass density of ordinary matter plus dark matter as roughly 0.3 times the critical density, and the mass equivalent of dark energy as roughly 0.7 times the critical density. we will refer to these values as the “standard model of the universe.” the latest (slightly improved) estimates for these values and the evidence for them will be given later in this chapter. calculations also require the current value of the hubble constant.
for table 29.1, we have adopted a hubble constant of 67.3 kilometers/second/ 29.2 • a model of the universe 1019 million parsecs (rather than rounding it to 70 kilometers/second/million parsecs), which is consistent with the 13.8 billion-year age of the universe estimated by the latest observations. once we assume a model, we can use it to calculate the age of the universe at the time an object emitted the light we see. as an example, table 29.1 lists the times that light was emitted by objects at different redshifts as fractions of the current age of the universe. the times are given for two very different models so you can get a feeling for the fact that the calculated ages are fairly similar. the first model assumes that the universe has a critical density of matter and no dark energy. the second model is the standard model described in the preceding paragraph. the first column in the table is the redshift, which is given by the equation z = δλ/λ0 and is a measure of how much the wavelength of light has been stretched by the expansion of the universe on its long journey to us.
ages of the universe at different redshifts redshift percent of current age of universe when the light was emitted (mass = critical density) percent of current age of universe when the light was emitted (mass = 0.3 critical density; dark energy = 0.7 critical density) 0 100 (now) 100 (now) 0.5 54 63 1.0 35 43 2.0 19 24 3.0 13 16 4.0 9 11 5.0 7 9 8.0 4 5 11.9 2.1 2.7 infinite 0 0 table 29.1 notice that as we find objects with higher and higher redshifts, we are looking back to smaller and smaller fractions of the age of the universe. the highest observed redshifts that can be measured with the hubble space telescope are close to 12 (figure 29.10). as table 29.1 shows, we are seeing these galaxies as they were when the universe was only about 3% as old as it is now.
remarkably, they were already formed at a time that was only about 700 million years after the big bang. with the james webb telescope, astronomers are now pushing that redshift limit even higher and further back in time. 1020 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org figure 29.10 hubble ultra-deep field. this image, called the hubble ultra deep field, shows faint galaxies, seen very far away and therefore very far back in time. the colored squares in the main image outline the locations of the galaxies. enlarged views of each galaxy are shown in the black-and-white images. the red lines mark each galaxy’s location. the “redshift” of each galaxy is indicated below each box, denoted by the symbol “z.” the redshift measures how much a galaxy’s ultraviolet and visible light has been stretched to infrared wavelengths by the universe’s expansion. the larger the redshift, the more distant the galaxy, and therefore the further astronomers are seeing back in time. one of the seven galaxies may be a distance breaker, observed at a redshift of 11.9.