if stronger gravity slows down the pace of time (relative to an outside observer), then the rate at which crest follows crest must be correspondingly slower—that is, the waves become less frequent. to maintain constant light speed (the key postulate in einstein’s theories of special and general relativity), the lower frequency must be compensated by a longer wavelength. this kind of increase in wavelength (when caused by the motion of the source) is what we called a redshift in radiation and spectra. here, because it is gravity and not motion that produces the longer wavelengths, we call the effect a gravitational redshift. the advent of space-age technology made it possible to measure gravitational redshift with very high accuracy. in the mid-1970s, a hydrogen maser, a device akin to a laser that produces a microwave radio signal at a particular wavelength, was carried by a rocket to an altitude of 10,000 kilometers. instruments on the ground were used to compare the frequency of the signal emitted by the rocket-borne maser with that from a similar maser on earth. the experiment showed that the stronger gravitational field at earth’s surface really did slow the flow of time relative to that measured by the maser in the rocket.
the observed effect matched the predictions of general relativity to within a few parts in 100,000. these are only a few examples of tests that have confirmed the predictions of general relativity. today, general relativity is accepted as our best description of gravity and is used by astronomers and physicists to understand the behavior of the centers of galaxies, the beginning of the universe, and the subject with which we began this chapter—the death of truly massive stars. relativity: a practical application by now you may be asking: why should i be bothered with relativity? can’t i live my life perfectly well without it? the answer is you can’t. every time a pilot lands an airplane or you use a gps to determine where you are on a drive or hike in the back country, you (or at least your gps-enabled device) must take the effects of both general and special relativity into account. gps relies on an array of 24 satellites orbiting the earth, and at least 4 of them are visible from any spot on earth. each satellite carries a precise atomic clock. your gps receiver detects the signals from those satellites that are overhead and calculates your position based on the time that it has taken those signals to reach you.
suppose you want to know where you are within 50 feet (gps devices can actually do much better than this). 838 24 • black holes and curved spacetime access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page856_img1.jpeg] since it takes only 50 billionths of a second for light to travel 50 feet, the clocks on the satellites must be synchronized to at least this accuracy—and relativistic effects must therefore be taken into account. the clocks on the satellites are orbiting earth at a speed of 14,000 kilometers per hour and are moving much faster than clocks on the surface of earth. according to einstein’s theory of relativity, the clocks on the satellites are ticking more slowly than earth-based clocks by about 7 millionths of a second per day. (we have not discussed the special theory of relativity, which deals with changes when objects move very fast, so you’ll have to take our word for this part.) the orbits of the satellites are 20,000 kilometers above earth, where gravity is about four times weaker than at earth’s surface. general relativity says that the orbiting clocks should tick about 45 millionths of a second faster than they would on earth.
the net effect is that the time on a satellite clock advances by about 38 microseconds per day. if these relativistic effects were not taken into account, navigational errors would start to add up and positions would be off by about 7 miles in only a single day. 24.5 black holes learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: let’s now apply what we have learned about gravity and spacetime curvature to the issue we started with: the collapsing core in a very massive star. we saw that if the core’s mass is greater than about 3 msun, theory says that nothing can stop the core from collapsing forever. we will examine this situation from two perspectives: first from a pre-einstein point of view, and then with the aid of general relativity. classical collapse let’s begin with a thought experiment. we want to know what speeds are required to escape from the gravitational pull of different objects. a rocket must be launched from the surface of earth at a very high speed if it is to escape the pull of earth’s gravity. in fact, any object—rocket, ball, astronomy book—that is thrown into the air with a velocity less than 11 kilometers per second will soon fall back to earth’s surface.