thus, the month will get longer. also, because the moon will be more distant, total eclipses of the sun will no longer be visible from earth. both the day and the month will continue to get longer, although bear in mind that the effects are very gradual. darwin’s calculations were confirmed by mirrors placed on the moon by apollo 11 astronauts. these show that the moon is moving away by 3.8 centimeters per year, and that ultimately—billions of years in the future—the day and the month will be the same length (about 47 of our present days). at this point the moon will be stationary in the sky over the same spot on earth, meaning some parts of earth will see the moon and its phases and other parts will never see them. this kind of alignment is already true for pluto’s moon charon (among others). its rotation and orbital period are the same length as a day on pluto.
4.7 eclipses of the sun and moon learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: one of the coincidences of living on earth at the present time is that the two most prominent astronomical objects, the sun and the moon, have nearly the same apparent size in the sky. although the sun is about 400 times larger in diameter than the moon, it is also about 400 times farther away, so both the sun and the moon have the same angular size—about 1/2°. as a result, the moon, as seen from earth, can appear to cover the sun, producing one of the most impressive events in nature. any solid object in the solar system casts a shadow by blocking the light of the sun from a region behind it. this shadow in space becomes apparent whenever another object moves into it. in general, an eclipse occurs whenever any part of either earth or the moon enters the shadow of the other. when the moon’s shadow strikes earth, people within that shadow see the sun at least partially covered by the moon; that is, they witness a solar eclipse. when the moon passes into the shadow of earth, people on the night side of earth see the moon darken in what is called a lunar eclipse.
let’s look at how these happen in more detail. describe what causes lunar and solar eclipses differentiate between a total and partial solar eclipse explain why lunar eclipses are much more common than solar eclipses 4.7 • eclipses of the sun and moon 125 [image: astronomy_openstax_page143_img1.jpeg] the shadows of earth and the moon consist of two parts: a cone where the shadow is darkest, called the umbra, and a lighter, more diffuse region of darkness called the penumbra. as you can imagine, the most spectacular eclipses occur when an object enters the umbra. figure 4.21 illustrates the appearance of the moon’s shadow and what the sun and moon would look like from different points within the shadow. figure 4.21 solar eclipse. (a) the shadow cast by a spherical body (the moon, for example) is shown. notice the dark umbra and the lighter penumbra. four points in the shadow are labeled with numbers. in (b) you see what the sun and moon would look like in the sky at the four labeled points. at position 1, you see a total eclipse. at positions 2 and 3, the eclipse is partial.
at position 4, the moon is farther away and thus cannot cover the sun completely; a ring of light thus shows around the sun, creating what is called an “annular” eclipse. if the path of the moon in the sky were identical to the path of the sun (the ecliptic), we might expect to see an eclipse of the sun and the moon each month—whenever the moon got in front of the sun or into the shadow of earth. however, as we mentioned, the moon’s orbit is tilted relative to the plane of earth’s orbit about the sun by about 5° (imagine two hula hoops with a common center, but tilted a bit). as a result, during most months, the moon is sufficiently above or below the ecliptic plane to avoid an eclipse. but when the two paths cross (twice a year), it is then “eclipse season” and eclipses are possible. eclipses of the sun the apparent or angular sizes of both the sun and moon vary slightly from time to time as their distances from earth vary.