(credit: modification of work by nasa) for more about isaac newton’s life and work, check out this timeline page (https://openstax.org/l/ 30isaacnewtime) with snapshots from his career, produced by the british broadcasting corporation (bbc). mass, volume, and density before we go on to discuss newton’s other work, we want to take a brief look at some terms that will be important to sort out clearly. we begin with mass, which is a measure of the amount of material within an object. the volume of an object is the measure of the physical space it occupies. volume is measured in cubic units, such as cubic centimeters or liters. the volume is the “size” of an object. a penny and an inflated balloon may both have the same mass, but they have very different volumes. the reason is that they also have very different densities, which is a measure of how much mass there is per unit volume. specifically, density is the mass divided by the volume. note that in everyday language we often use “heavy” and “light” as indications of density (rather than weight) as, for instance, when we say that iron is heavy or that whipped cream is light.
the units of density that will be used in this book are grams per cubic centimeter (g/cm3).1 if a block of some material has a mass of 300 grams and a volume of 100 cm3, its density is 3 g/cm3. familiar materials span a considerable range in density, from artificial materials such as plastic insulating foam (less than 0.1 g/cm3) to gold (19.3 g/cm3). table 3.1 gives the densities of some familiar materials. in the astronomical universe, much more remarkable densities can be found, all the way from a comet’s tail (10-16 g/cm3) to a collapsed “star corpse” called a neutron star (1015 g/cm3). link to learning 1 generally we use standard metric (or si) units in this book. the proper metric unit of density in that system is kg/m3.
but to most 78 3 • orbits and gravity access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page96_img1.jpeg] densities of common materials material density (g/cm3) gold 19.3 lead 11.3 iron 7.9 earth (bulk) 5.5 rock (typical) 2.5 water 1 wood (typical) 0.8 insulating foam 0.1 silica gel 0.02 table 3.1 to sum up, mass is how much, volume is how big, and density is how tightly packed. you can play with a simple animation (https://openstax.org/l/30phetsimdenmas) demonstrating the relationship between the concepts of density, mass, and volume, and find out why objects like wood float in water. angular momentum a concept that is a bit more complex, but important for understanding many astronomical objects, is angular momentum, which is a measure of the rotation of a body as it revolves around some fixed point (an example is a planet orbiting the sun). the angular momentum of an object is defined as the product of its mass, its velocity, and its distance from the fixed point around which it revolves.
if these three quantities remain constant—that is, if the motion of a particular object takes place at a constant velocity at a fixed distance from the spin center—then the angular momentum is also a constant. kepler’s second law is a consequence of the conservation of angular momentum. as a planet approaches the sun on its elliptical orbit and the distance to the spin center decreases, the planet speeds up to conserve the angular momentum. similarly, when the planet is farther from the sun, it moves more slowly. the conservation of angular momentum is illustrated by figure skaters, who bring their arms and legs in to spin more rapidly, and extend their arms and legs to slow down (figure 3.8). you can duplicate this yourself on link to learning people, g/cm3 provides a more meaningful unit because the density of water is exactly 1 g/cm3, and this is useful information for comparison. density expressed in g/cm3 is sometimes called specific density or specific weight. 3.2 • newton’s great synthesis 79 a well-oiled swivel stool by starting yourself spinning slowly with your arms extended and then pulling your arms in.