(b) encoded onto a gold-coated copper disk, the voyager record contains 118 photographs, 90 minutes of music from around the world, greetings in almost 60 languages, and other audio material. it is a summary of the sights and sounds of earth. (credit a, b: modification of work by nasa) link to learning 30.4 • the search for extraterrestrial intelligence 1077 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1095_img1.jpeg] the voyager message an excerpt from the voyager record: “we cast this message into the cosmos. it is likely to survive a billion years into our future, when our civilization is profoundly altered. . . . if [another] civilization intercepts voyager and can understand these recorded contents, here is our message: this is a present from a small, distant world, a token of our sounds, our science, our images, our music, our thoughts, and our feelings. we are attempting to survive our time so we may live into yours. we hope, someday, having solved the problems we face, to join a community of galactic civilizations.
this record represents our hope and our determination, and our goodwill in a vast and awesome universe.” —jimmy carter, president of the united states of america, june 16, 1977 communicating with the stars if direct visits among stars are unlikely, we must turn to the alternative for making contact: exchanging messages. here the news is a lot better. we already use a messenger—light or, more generally, electromagnetic waves—that moves through space at the fastest speed in the universe. traveling at 300,000 kilometers per second, light reaches the nearest star in only 4 years and does so at a tiny fraction of the cost of sending material objects. these advantages are so clear and obvious that we assume they will occur to any other species of intelligent beings that develop technology. however, we have access to a wide spectrum of electromagnetic radiation, ranging from the longest- wavelength radio waves to the shortest-wavelength gamma rays. which would be the best for interstellar communication? it would not be smart to select a wavelength that is easily absorbed by interstellar gas and dust, or one that is unlikely to penetrate the atmosphere of a planet like ours. nor would we want to pick a wavelength that has lots of competition for attention in our neighborhood.
one final criterion makes the selection easier: we want the radiation to be inexpensive enough to produce in large quantities. when we consider all these requirements, radio waves turn out to be the best answer. being the lowest-frequency (and lowest-energy) band of the spectrum, they are not very expensive to produce, and we already use them extensively for communications on earth. they are not significantly absorbed by interstellar dust and gas. with some exceptions, they easily pass through earth’s atmosphere and through the atmospheres of the other planets we are acquainted with. the cosmic haystack having made the decision that radio is the most likely means of communication among intelligent civilizations, we still have many questions and a daunting task ahead of us. shall we send a message, or try to receive one? obviously, if every civilization decides to receive only, then no one will be sending, and everyone will be disappointed. on the other hand, it may be appropriate for us to begin by listening, since we are likely to be among the most primitive civilizations in the galaxy who are interested in exchanging messages. we do not make this statement to insult the human species (which, with certain exceptions, we are rather fond of).
instead, we base it on the fact that humans have had the ability to receive (or send) a radio message across interstellar distances for only a few decades. compared to the ages of the stars and the galaxy, this is a mere instant. if there are civilizations out there that are ahead of us in development by even a short time (in the cosmic sense), they are likely to have a technology head start of many, many years. making connections 1078 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org in other words, we, who have just started, may well be the “youngest” species in the galaxy with this capability (see the discussion in example 30.1). just as the youngest members of a community are often told to be quiet and listen to their elders for a while before they say something foolish, so may we want to begin our exercise in extraterrestrial communication by listening. even restricting our activities to listening, however, leaves us with an array of challenging questions. for example, if an extraterrestrial civilization’s signal is too weak to be detected by our present-day radio telescopes, we will not detect them.