4.5 phases and motions of the moon the moon’s monthly cycle of phases results from the changing angle of its illumination by the sun. the full moon is visible in the sky only during the night; other phases are visible during the day as well. because its period of revolution is the same as its period of rotation, the moon always keeps the same face toward earth. 4.6 ocean tides and the moon the twice-daily ocean tides are primarily the result of the moon’s differential force on the material of earth’s crust and ocean. these tidal forces cause ocean water to flow into two tidal bulges on opposite sides of earth; each day, earth rotates through these bulges. actual ocean tides are complicated by the additional effects of the sun and by the shape of the coasts and ocean basins. 4.7 eclipses of the sun and moon the sun and moon have nearly the same angular size (about 1/2°). a solar eclipse occurs when the moon moves between the sun and earth, casting its shadow on a part of earth’s surface. if the eclipse is total, the light from the bright disk of the sun is completely blocked, and the solar atmosphere (the corona) comes into view.
solar eclipses take place rarely in any one location, but they are among the most spectacular sights in nature. a lunar eclipse takes place when the moon moves into earth’s shadow; it is visible (weather permitting) from the entire night hemisphere of earth. for further exploration articles bakich, m. “a timeline of famous eclipses.” astronomy (october 2023): 36. short thumbnail stories of historical eclipses of note. also see his “a history of solar eclipses” in astronomy (march 2023): 40. bakich, m. “the next 20 years of solar eclipses.” astronomy (september 2021): 49. a planning guide for future eclipses. coco, m. “not just another pretty phase.” astronomy (july 1994): 76. moon phases explained. gingerich, o. “notes on the gregorian calendar reform.” sky & telescope (december 1982): 530. kluepfel, c. “how accurate is the gregorian calendar?” sky & telescope (november 1982): 417. harrington, p. “filters for observing the sun.” astronomy (april 2021): 42.
ways to observe the sun safely through binoculars and telescopes, for example during partial eclipses. krupp, e. “calendar worlds.” sky & telescope (january 2001): 103. on how the days of the week got their names. 4 • for further exploration 133 krupp, e. “behind the curve.” sky & telescope (september 2002): 68. on the reform of the calendar by pope gregory xiii. macrobert, a., & sinnott, r. “young moon hunting.” sky & telescope (february 2005): 75. hints for finding the moon as soon after its new phase as possible. mallama, a. “understanding lunar eclipses,” sky & telescope, (november 2022): 34. clear introduction, with a table of upcoming eclipses. pasachoff, j. “solar eclipse science: still going strong.” sky & telescope (february 2001): 40. on what we have learned and are still learning from eclipses. regas, d. “the quest for totality.” sky & telescope (july 2012): 36. on eclipse chasing as a hobby.
schaefer, b. “lunar eclipses that changed the world.” sky & telescope (december 1992): 639. schaefer, b. “solar eclipses that changed the world.” sky & telescope (may 1994): 36. shubinski, r. “defining time.” astronomy (december 2021): 54. a brief history of human timekeeping. websites a walk through time: the evolution of time measurement through the ages: https://www.nist.gov/pml/time- and-frequency-division/popular-links/walk-through-time (https://www.nist.gov/pml/time-and-frequency- division/popular-links/walk-through-time). a web-based exhibit from national institute of standards and technology. american astronomical society eclipse pages: http://eclipse.aas.org (http://eclipse.aas.org). compiled for the april 2024 north american total eclipse, these pages have lots of information, images, consumer recommendations, and educational materials good for any future eclipse as well. calendars through the ages: http://www.webexhibits.org/calendars/index.html (http://www.webexhibits.org/ calendars/index.html). like a good museum exhibit on the web.