near sunspot maximum, small flares occur several times per day, and major ones may occur every few weeks. figure 15.20 solar flare. the bright white area seen on the right side of the sun in this image from the solar dynamics observatory spacecraft is a solar flare that was observed on june 25, 2015. (credit: nasa/sdo) flares, like the one shown in figure 15.21, are often observed in the red light of hydrogen, but the visible emission is only a tiny fraction of the energy released when a solar flare explodes. at the moment of the 15.3 • solar activity above the photosphere 527 [image: astronomy_openstax_page545_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page545_img2.jpeg] explosion, the matter associated with the flare is heated to temperatures as high as 10 million k. at such high temperatures, a flood of x-ray and ultraviolet radiation is emitted. flares seem to occur when magnetic fields pointing in opposite directions release energy by interacting with and destroying each other—much as a stretched rubber band releases energy when it breaks.
what is different about flares is that their magnetic interactions cover a large volume in the solar corona and release a tremendous amount of electromagnetic radiation. in some cases, immense quantities of coronal material—mainly protons and electrons—may also be ejected at high speeds (500–1000 kilometers per second) into interplanetary space. such a coronal mass ejection (cme) can affect earth in a number of ways (which we will discuss in the section on space weather). figure 15.21 flare and coronal mass ejection. this sequence of four images shows the evolution over time of a giant eruption on the sun. (a) the event began at the location of a sunspot group, and (b) a flare is seen in far-ultraviolet light. (c) fourteen hours later, a cme is seen blasting out into space. (d) three hours later, this cme has expanded to form a giant cloud of particles escaping from the sun and is beginning the journey out into the solar system. the white circle in (c) and (d) shows the diameter of the solar photosphere.
the larger dark area shows where light from the sun has been blocked out by a specially designed instrument to make it possible to see the faint emission from the corona. (credit a, b, c, d: modification of work by soho/eit, soho/lasco, soho/mdi (esa & nasa)) see a coronal mass ejection (https://openstax.org/l/30cormaej) recorded by the solar dynamics observatory. active regions to bring the discussion of the last two sections together, astronomers now realize that sunspots, flares, and bright regions in the chromosphere and corona tend to occur together on the sun in time and space. that is, they all tend to have similar longitudes and latitudes, but they are located at different heights in the atmosphere. because they all occur together, they vary with the sunspot cycle. link to learning 528 15 • the sun: a garden-variety star access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page546_img1.jpeg] figure 15.22 solar cycle. this dramatic sequence of images taken from the soho satellite over a period of 11 years shows how active regions change during the solar cycle.
the images were taken in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum and show that active regions on the sun increase and decrease during the cycle. sunspots are located in the cooler photosphere, beneath the hot gases shown in this image, and vary in phase with the emission from these hot gases—more sunspots and more emission from hot gases occur together. (credit: modification of work by esa/nasa/soho) for example, flares are more likely to occur near sunspot maximum, and the corona is much more conspicuous at that time (see figure 15.22). a place on the sun where a number of these phenomena are seen is called an active region (figure 15.23). as you might deduce from our earlier discussion, active regions are always associated with strong magnetic fields. figure 15.23 solar active region observed at different heights in the sun’s atmosphere.