this means that deep convection currents of rising hot air and falling cooler air circulate throughout the atmospheres of the planets in the vertical direction. the main features of jupiter’s visible clouds (see figure 11.2 and figure 11.10, for example) are alternating dark and light bands that stretch around the planet parallel to the equator. these bands are semi-permanent features, although they shift in intensity and position from year to year. consistent with the small tilt of jupiter’s axis, the pattern does not change with the seasons. more fundamental than these bands are underlying east-west wind patterns in the atmosphere, which do not appear to change at all, even over many decades. these are illustrated in figure 11.17, which indicates how strong the winds are at each latitude for the giant planets. at jupiter’s equator, a jet stream flows eastward with a speed of about 90 meters per second (300 kilometers per hour), similar to the speed of jet streams in earth’s upper atmosphere. at higher latitudes there are alternating east- and west-moving streams, with each hemisphere an almost perfect mirror image of the other. saturn shows a similar pattern, but with a much stronger equatorial jet stream, as we noted earlier.
figure 11.17 winds on the giant planets. this image compares the winds of the giant planets, illustrating that wind speed (shown on the horizontal axis) and wind direction vary with latitude (shown on the vertical axis). winds are measured relative to a planet’s internal rotation speed. a positive velocity means that the winds are blowing in the same direction as, but faster than, the planet’s internal rotation. a negative velocity means that the winds are blowing more slowly than the planet’s internal rotation. the light zones on jupiter are regions of upwelling air capped by white ammonia cirrus clouds. they apparently represent the tops of upward-moving convection currents.2 the darker belts are regions where the cooler atmosphere moves downward, completing the convection cycle; they are darker because fewer ammonia clouds mean we can see deeper into the atmosphere, perhaps down to a region of ammonium hydrosulfide (nh4sh) clouds. the galileo probe sampled one of the clearest of these dry downdrafts. in spite of the strange seasons induced by the 98° tilt of its axis, uranus’ basic circulation is parallel with its equator, as is the case on jupiter and saturn.
the mass of the atmosphere and its capacity to store heat are so great that the alternating 42-year periods of sunlight and darkness have little effect. in fact, voyager measurements show that the atmospheric temperature is even a few degrees higher on the dark winter side than on the hemisphere facing the sun. this is another indication that the behavior of such giant planet atmospheres is a complex problem that we do not fully understand. 2 recall from earlier chapters that convection is a process in which liquids, heated from underneath, have regions where hot material rises and cooler material descends. you can see convection at work if you heat oatmeal on a stovetop or watch miso soup boil. 384 11 • the giant planets access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page402_img1.jpeg] neptune’s weather is characterized by strong east-west winds generally similar to those observed on jupiter and saturn. the highest wind speeds near its equator reach 2100 kilometers per hour, even higher than the peak winds on saturn. the neptune equatorial jet stream actually approaches supersonic speeds (faster than the speed of sound in neptune’s air).
giant storms on giant planets superimposed on the regular atmospheric circulation patterns we have just described are many local disturbances—weather systems or storms, to borrow the term we use on earth. the most prominent of these are large, oval-shaped, high-pressure regions on both jupiter (figure 11.18) and neptune. figure 11.18 storms on jupiter. two examples of storms on jupiter illustrate the use of enhanced color and contrast to bring out faint features. (a) the three oval-shaped white storms below and to the left of jupiter’s great red spot are highly active, and moved closer together over the course of seven months between 1994 and 1995. (b) the clouds of jupiter are turbulent and ever-changing, as shown in this hubble space telescope image from 2007. (credit a: modification of work by reta beebe, amy simon (new mexico state univ.), and nasa; credit b: modification of work by nasa, esa, and a.