inspired by a number of ingenious experiments that showed an intimate relationship between electricity and magnetism, maxwell developed a theory that describes both electricity and magnetism with only a small number of elegant equations. it is this theory that gives us important insights into the nature and behavior of light. figure 5.2 james clerk maxwell (1831–1879). maxwell unified the rules governing electricity and magnetism into a coherent theory. explain the evidence for maxwell’s electromagnetic model of light describe the relationship between wavelength, frequency, and speed of light discuss the particle model of light and the definition of photon explain how and why the amount of light we see from an object depends upon its distance 142 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page160_img1.jpeg] maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism we will look at the structure of the atom in more detail later, but we begin by noting that the typical atom consists of several types of particles, a number of which have not only mass but an additional property called electric charge. in the nucleus (central part) of every atom are protons, which are positively charged; outside the nucleus are electrons, which have a negative charge.
maxwell’s theory deals with these electric charges and their effects, especially when they are moving. in the vicinity of an electron charge, another charge feels a force of attraction or repulsion: opposite charges attract; like charges repel. when charges are not in motion, we observe only this electric attraction or repulsion. if charges are in motion, however (as they are inside every atom and in a wire carrying a current), then we measure another force called magnetism. magnetism was well known for much of recorded human history, but its cause was not understood until the nineteenth century. experiments with electric charges demonstrated that magnetism was the result of moving charged particles. sometimes, the motion is clear, as in the coils of heavy wire that make an industrial electromagnet. other times, it is more subtle, as in the kind of magnet you buy in a hardware store, in which many of the electrons inside the atoms are spinning in roughly the same direction; it is the alignment of their motion that causes the material to become magnetic. physicists use the word field to describe the action of forces that one object exerts on other distant objects.
for example, we say the sun produces a gravitational field that controls earth’s orbit, even though the sun and earth do not come directly into contact. using this terminology, we can say that stationary electric charges produce electric fields, and moving electric charges also produce magnetic fields. actually, the relationship between electric and magnetic phenomena is even more profound. experiments showed that changing magnetic fields could produce electric currents (and thus changing electric fields), and changing electric currents could in turn produce changing magnetic fields. so once begun, electric and magnetic field changes could continue to trigger each other. maxwell analyzed what would happen if electric charges were oscillating (moving constantly back and forth) and found that the resulting pattern of electric and magnetic fields would spread out and travel rapidly through space. something similar happens when a raindrop strikes the surface of water or a frog jumps into a pond. the disturbance moves outward and creates a pattern we call a wave in the water (figure 5.3). you might, at first, think that there must be very few situations in nature where electric charges oscillate, but this is not at all the case. as we shall see, atoms and molecules (which consist of charged particles) oscillate back and forth all the time.
the resulting electromagnetic disturbances are among the most common phenomena in the universe. 5.1 • the behavior of light 143 figure 5.3 making waves. an oscillation in a pool of water creates an expanding disturbance called a wave. (credit: modification of work by "vastateparksstaff"/flickr) maxwell was able to calculate the speed at which an electromagnetic disturbance moves through space; he found that it is equal to the speed of light, which had been measured experimentally. on that basis, he speculated that light was one form of a family of possible electromagnetic disturbances called electromagnetic radiation, a conclusion that was again confirmed in laboratory experiments. when light (reflected from the pages of an astronomy textbook, for example) enters a human eye, its changing electric and magnetic fields stimulate nerve endings, which then transmit the information contained in these changing fields to the brain. the science of astronomy is primarily about analyzing radiation from distant objects to understand what they are and how they work. the wave-like characteristics of light the changing electric and magnetic fields in light are similar to the waves that can be set up in a quiet pool of water.