although the surface today is dry and cold, evidence collected by spacecraft suggests that mars once had blue skies and lakes of liquid water. even today, it is the sort of place we can imagine astronauts visiting and perhaps even setting up permanent bases. figure 10.13 mars photographed by the hubble space telescope. this is one of the best photos of mars taken from our planet, obtained in june 2001 when mars was only 68 million kilometers away. the resolution is about 20 kilometers—much better than can be obtained with ground-based telescopes but still insufficient to reveal the underlying geology of mars. (credit: modification of work by nasa and the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura)) spacecraft exploration of mars mars has been intensively investigated by spacecraft. more than 50 spacecraft have been launched toward mars, but only about half were fully successful. the first visitor was the us mariner 4, which flew past mars in 1965 and transmitted 22 photos to earth. these pictures showed an apparently bleak planet with abundant impact craters. in those days, craters were unexpected; some people who were romantically inclined still hoped to see canals or something like them.
in any case, newspaper headlines sadly announced that mars was a “dead planet.” in 1971, nasa’s mariner 9 became the first spacecraft to orbit another planet, mapping the entire surface of mars at a resolution of about 1 kilometer and discovering a great variety of geological features, including volcanoes, huge canyons, intricate layers on the polar caps, and channels that appeared to have been cut by running water. geologically, mars didn’t look so dead after all. the twin viking spacecraft of the 1970s were among the most ambitious and successful of all planetary discuss the main missions that have explored mars explain what we have learned from examination of meteorites from mars describe the various features found on the surface of mars compare the volcanoes and canyons on mars with those of earth describe the general conditions on the surface of mars 10.4 • the geology of mars 335 [image: astronomy_openstax_page353_img1.jpeg] missions. two orbiters surveyed the planet and served to relay communications for two landers on the surface.
after an exciting and sometimes frustrating search for a safe landing spot, the viking 1 lander touched down on the surface of chryse planitia (the plains of gold) on july 20, 1976, exactly 7 years after neil armstrong’s historic first step on the moon. two months later, viking 2 landed with equal success in another plain farther north, called utopia. the landers photographed the surface with high resolution and carried out complex experiments searching for evidence of life, while the orbiters provided a global perspective on mars geology. mars languished unvisited for two decades after viking. two more spacecraft were launched toward mars, by nasa and the russian space agency, but both failed before reaching the planet. the situation changed, beginning in the 1990s, as nasa began a new exploration program using spacecraft that were smaller and less expensive than viking. the first of the new missions, appropriately called pathfinder, landed the first wheeled, solar-powered rover on the martian surface on july 4, 1997 (figure 10.14).
an orbiter called mars global surveyor (mgs) arrived a few months later and began high-resolution photography of the entire surface over more than one martian year. the most dramatic discovery by this spacecraft, which continued to operate until 2006, was evidence of gullies apparently cut by surface water, as we will discuss later. these missions were followed in 2003 by the nasa mars odyssey orbiter, and the esa mars express orbiter, both carrying high-resolution cameras. a gamma-ray spectrometer on odyssey discovered a large amount of subsurface hydrogen (probably in the form of frozen water). subsequent orbiters included the nasa mars reconnaissance orbiter to evaluate future landing sites, maven to study the upper atmosphere, and india’s mangalayaan, also focused on study of mars’ thin layers of air. several of these orbiters are also equipped to communicate with landers and rovers on the surface and serve as data relays to earth. figure 10.14 surface view from mars pathfinder. the scene from the pathfinder lander shows a windswept plain, sculpted long ago when water flowed out of the martian highlands and into the depression where the spacecraft landed.