communications networks could be prepared for malfunctions and have backup plans in place. spacewalks could be timed to avoid major solar outbursts. scientists are now trying to find ways to predict where and when flares and cmes will occur, and whether they will be big, fast events or small, slow ones with little consequence for earth. the strategy is to relate changes in the appearance of small, active regions and changes in local magnetic fields on the sun to subsequent eruptions. however, right now, our predictive capability is still poor, and so the only real warning we have is from actually seeing cmes and flares occur. since a cme travels outward at about 500 kilometers per second, an observation of an eruption provides several days warning at the distance of earth. however, the severity of the impact on earth depends on how the magnetic field associated with the cme is oriented relative to earth’s magnetic field. the orientation can be measured only when the cme flows past a satellite we have put up for this purpose. however, it is located only about an hour upstream from earth. space weather predictions are now available online to scientists and the public.
outlooks are given a week ahead, bulletins are issued when there is an event that is likely to be of interest to the public, and warnings and alerts are posted when an event is imminent or already under way (figure 15.25). figure 15.25 noaa space weather prediction operations center. bill murtagh, a space weather forecaster, leads a workshop on preparedness for events like geomagnetic storms. (credit: modification of work by fema/jerry defelice) 532 15 • the sun: a garden-variety star access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page550_img1.jpeg] to find public information and alerts about space weather, you can turn to the national space weather prediction center (https://openstax.org/l/30nswpc) or spaceweather (https://openstax.org/l/30spcweath3) for consolidated information from many sources. more satellites are being launched that will allow us to determine whether cmes are headed toward earth and how big they are. models are being developed that will then allow scientists to use early information about the cme to predict its likely impact on earth.
the hope is that soon, solar weather forecasting will have some of the predictive capability that meteorologists have achieved for terrestrial weather at earth’s surface. however, the most difficult events to predict are the largest and most damaging storms—hurricanes on earth and extreme, rare storm events on the sun. thus, it is inevitable that the sun will continue to surprise us. e x a m p l e 1 5 . 1 the timing of solar events a basic equation is useful in figuring out when events on the sun will impact earth: dividing both sides by v, we get suppose you observe a major solar flare while astronauts are orbiting earth. if the average speed of solar wind is 400 km/s and the distance to the sun is , how long will it be before the charged particles ejected from the sun during the flare reach the space station? solution the time required for solar wind particles to reach earth is t = d/v. check your learning how many days would it take for the particles to reach earth if the solar wind speed increased to 500 km/s? answer: earth’s climate and the sunspot cycle: is there a connection?
while the sun rises faithfully every day at a time that can be calculated precisely, scientists have determined that the sun’s energy output is not truly constant but varies over the centuries by a small amount—probably less than 1%. we’ve seen that the number of sunspots varies, with the time between sunspot maxima of about 11 years, and that the number of sunspots at maximum is not always the same. considerable evidence shows that between the years 1645 and 1715, the number of sunspots, even at sunspot maximum, was much lower link to learning 15.4 • space weather 533 than it is now. this interval of significantly low sunspot numbers was first noted by gustav spӧrer in 1887 and then by e. w. maunder in 1890; it is now called the maunder minimum. the variation in the number of sunspots over the past three centuries is shown in figure 15.26. besides the maunder minimum in the seventeenth century, sunspot numbers were somewhat lower during the first part of the nineteenth century than they are now; this period is called the little maunder minimum. figure 15.26 numbers of sunspots over time.