suppose we start when earth’s orbital position is at day 1, with both the sun and some distant star (located in the direction indicated by the long white arrow pointing left), directly in line with the zenith for the observer on earth. when earth has completed one rotation with respect to the distant star and is at day 2, the long arrow again points to the same distant star. however, notice that because of the movement of earth along its orbit from day 1 to 2, the sun has not yet reached a position above the observer. to complete a solar day, earth must rotate an additional amount, equal to 1/365 of a full turn. the time required for this extra rotation is 1/365 of a day, or about 4 minutes. so the solar day is about 4 minutes longer than the sidereal day. explain the difference between the solar day and the sidereal day explain mean solar time and the reason for time zones 4.3 • keeping time 111 figure 4.10 difference between a sidereal day and a solar day. this is a top view, looking down as earth orbits the sun.
because earth moves around the sun (roughly 1° per day), after one complete rotation of earth relative to the stars, we do not see the sun in the same position. because our ordinary clocks are set to solar time, stars rise 4 minutes earlier each day. astronomers prefer sidereal time for planning their observations because in that system, a star rises at the same time every day. e x a m p l e 4 . 3 sidereal time and solar time the sun makes a complete circle in the sky approximately every 24 hours, while the stars make a complete circle in the sky in 4 minutes less time, or 23 hours and 56 minutes. this causes the positions of the stars at a given time of day or night to change slightly each day. since stars rise 4 minutes earlier each day, that works out to about 2 hours per month . so, if a particular constellation rises at sunset during the winter, you can be sure that by the summer, it will rise about 12 hours earlier, with the sunrise, and it will not be so easily visible in the night sky. let’s say that tonight the bright star sirius rises at 7:00 p.m.
from a given location so that by midnight, it is very high in the sky. at what time will sirius rise in three months? solution in three months’ time, sirius will be rising earlier by: it will rise at about 1:00 p.m. and be high in the sky at around sunset instead of midnight. sirius is the brightest star in the constellation of canis major (the big dog). so, some other constellation will be prominently visible high in the sky at this later date. check your learning if a star rises at 8:30 p.m. tonight, approximately what time will it rise two months from now? answer: in two months, the star will rise: this means it will rise at 4:30 p.m. apparent solar time we can define apparent solar time as time reckoned by the actual position of the sun in the sky (or, during the night, its position below the horizon). this is the kind of time indicated by sundials, and it probably 112 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page130_img1.jpeg] represents the earliest measure of time used by ancient civilizations.
today, we adopt the middle of the night as the starting point of the day and measure time in hours elapsed since midnight. during the first half of the day, the sun has not yet reached the local meridian (the great circle in the sky that passes through our zenith). we designate those hours as before midday (ante meridiem, or a.m.), before the sun reaches the local meridian. we customarily start numbering the hours after noon over again and designate them by p.m. (post meridiem), after the sun reaches the local meridian. although apparent solar time seems simple, it is not really very convenient to use. the exact length of an apparent solar day varies slightly during the year. the eastward progress of the sun in its annual journey around the sky is not uniform because the speed of earth varies slightly in its elliptical orbit. another complication is that earth’s axis of rotation is not perpendicular to the plane of its revolution. thus, apparent solar time does not advance at a uniform rate. after the invention of mechanical clocks that run at a uniform rate, it became necessary to abandon the apparent solar day as the fundamental unit of time.