no elements beyond lithium could form in the first few minutes. that 4-minute period was the end of the time when the entire universe was a fusion factory. in the cool universe we know today, the fusion of new elements is limited to the centers of stars and the explosions of supernovae. still, the fact that the big bang model allows the creation of a good deal of helium is the answer to a long- standing mystery in astronomy. put simply, there is just too much helium in the universe to be explained by what happens inside stars. all the generations of stars that have produced helium since the big bang cannot account for the quantity of helium we observe. furthermore, even the oldest stars and the most distant galaxies show significant amounts of helium. these observations find a natural explanation in the synthesis of helium by the big bang itself during the first few minutes of time. we estimate that 10 times more helium was manufactured in the first 4 minutes of the universe than in all the generations of stars during the succeeding 10 to 15 billion years. learning from deuterium we can learn many things from the way the early universe made atomic nuclei.
it turns out that all of the deuterium (a hydrogen nucleus with a neutron in it) in the universe was formed during the first 4 minutes. in stars, any region hot enough to fuse two protons to form a deuterium nucleus is also hot enough to change it further—either by destroying it through a collision with an energetic photon or by converting it into helium through nuclear reactions. the amount of deuterium that can be produced in the first 4 minutes of creation depends on the density of the universe at the time deuterium was formed. if the density were relatively high, nearly all the deuterium would have been converted into helium through interactions with protons, just as it is in stars. if the density were relatively low, then the universe would have expanded and thinned out rapidly enough that some deuterium would have survived. the amount of deuterium we see today thus gives us a clue to the density of the universe when it was about 4 minutes old. theoretical models can relate the density then to the density now; thus, measurements of the abundance of deuterium today can give us an estimate of the current density of the universe.
the measurements of deuterium indicate that the present-day density of ordinary matter—protons and neutrons—is about kg/m3. deuterium can only provide an estimate of the density of ordinary matter because the abundance of deuterium is determined by the particles that interact to form it, namely protons and neutrons alone. from the abundance of deuterium, we know that not enough protons and neutrons are present, by a factor of about 20, to produce a critical-density universe. we do know, however, that there are dark matter particles that add to the overall matter density of the universe, which is then higher than what is calculated for ordinary matter alone. because dark matter particles do not affect the production of deuterium, measurement of the deuterium abundance cannot tell us how 1026 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org much dark matter exists. dark matter is made of some exotic kind of particle, not yet detected in any earthbound laboratory. it is definitely not made of protons and neutrons like the readers of this book.
29.4 the cosmic microwave background learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the description of the first few minutes of the universe is based on theoretical calculations. it is crucial, however, that a scientific theory should be testable. what predictions does it make? and do observations show those predictions to be accurate? one success of the theory of the first few minutes of the universe is the correct prediction of the amount of helium in the universe. another prediction is that a significant milestone in the history of the universe occurred about 380,000 years after the big bang. scientists have directly observed what the universe was like at this early stage, and these observations offer some of the strongest support for the big bang theory. to find out what this milestone was, let’s look at what theory tells us about what happened during the first few hundred thousand years after the big bang. the fusion of helium and lithium was completed when the universe was about 4 minutes old. the universe then continued to resemble the interior of a star in some ways for a few hundred thousand years more. it remained hot and opaque, with radiation being scattered from one particle to another.