even more recent is our realization that, over the history of earth, these impacts have had an important explain the scarcity of impact craters on earth compared with other planets and moons describe the evidence for recent impacts on earth detail how a massive impact changed the conditions for life on earth, leading to the extinction of the dinosaurs describe how impacts have influenced the evolution of life on earth discuss the search for objects that could potentially collide with our planet 276 8 • earth as a planet access for free at openstax.org influence on the evolution of life. figure 8.19 ouarkziz impact crater. located in algeria, this 4-km-wide crater (the round feature in the center) is the result of a meteor impact during the cretaceous period. although the crater has experienced heavy erosion, this image from the international space station shows the circular pattern resulting from impact. (credit: modification of work by nasa) recent impacts the collision of interplanetary debris with earth is not a hypothetical idea. evidence of relatively recent impacts can be found on our planet’s surface. one well-studied historic collision took place on june 30, 1908, near the tunguska river in siberia.
in this desolate region, there was a remarkable explosion in the atmosphere about 8 kilometers above the surface. the shock wave flattened more than a thousand square kilometers of forest (figure 8.20). herds of reindeer and other animals were killed, and a man at a trading post 80 kilometers from the blast was thrown from his chair and knocked unconscious. the blast wave spread around the world, as recorded by instruments designed to measure changes in atmospheric pressure. figure 8.20 aftermath of the tunguska explosion. this photograph, taken 19 years after the blast, shows a part of the forest that was destroyed by the 5-megaton explosion, resulting when a stony projectile about the size of a small office building (40 meters in diameter) collided with our planet. (credit: modification of work by leonid kulik) 8.5 • cosmic influences on the evolution of earth 277 [image: astronomy_openstax_page295_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page295_img2.jpeg] despite this violence, no craters were formed by the tunguska explosion.
shattered by atmospheric pressure, the stony projectile with a diameter of approximately 60 meters disintegrated above our planet’s surface to create a blast equivalent to a 10-megaton nuclear bomb. had it been smaller or more fragile, the impacting body would have dissipated its energy at high altitude and probably attracted no attention. today, such high- altitude atmospheric explosions are monitored regularly by military surveillance systems. if it had been larger or made of stronger material (such as metal), the tunguska projectile would have penetrated all the way to the surface of earth and exploded to form a crater. instead, only the heat and shock of the atmospheric explosion reached the surface, but the devastation it left behind in siberia bore witness to the power of such impacts. imagine if the same rocky impactor had exploded over new york city in 1908; history books might today record it as one of the most deadly events in human history. tens of thousands of people witnessed directly the explosion of a smaller (20-meter) projectile over the russian city of chelyabinsk on an early winter morning in 2013.
it exploded at a height of 21 kilometers in a burst of light brighter than the sun, and the shockwave of the 0.5-megaton explosion broke tens of thousands of windows and sent hundreds of people to the hospital. rock fragments (meteorites) were easily collected by people in the area after the blast because they landed on fresh snow. dr. david morrison, one of the original authors of this textbook, provides a nontechnical talk (https://openstax.org/l/30chelyabinskex) about the chelyabinsk explosion, and impacts in general. the best-known recent crater on earth was formed about 50,000 years ago in arizona. the projectile in this case was a lump of iron about 40 meters in diameter. now called meteor crater and a major tourist attraction on the way to the grand canyon, the crater is about a mile across and has all the features associated with similar-size lunar impact craters (figure 8.21). meteor crater is one of the few impact features on earth that remains relatively intact; some older craters are so eroded that only a trained eye can distinguish them. nevertheless, more than 150 have been identified.