22.3 checking out the theory learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: in the previous section, we indicated that open clusters are younger than globular clusters, and associations are typically even younger. in this section, we will show how we determine the ages of these star clusters. the key observation is that the stars in these different types of clusters are found in different places in the h–r diagram, and we can use their locations in the diagram in combination with theoretical calculations to estimate how long they have lived. h–r diagrams of young clusters what does theory predict for the h–r diagram of a cluster whose stars have recently condensed from an interstellar cloud? remember that at every stage of evolution, massive stars evolve more quickly than their lower-mass counterparts. after a few million years (“recently” for astronomers), the most massive stars should have completed their contraction phase and be on the main sequence, while the less massive ones should be off to the right, still on their way to the main sequence. these ideas are illustrated in figure 22.8, which shows the h–r diagram calculated by r.
kippenhahn and his associates at munich university for a hypothetical cluster with an age of 3 million years. explain how the h–r diagram of a star cluster can be related to the cluster’s age and the stages of evolution of its stellar members describe how the main-sequence turnoff of a cluster reveals its age 22.3 • checking out the theory 751 figure 22.8 young cluster h–r diagram. we see an h–r diagram for a hypothetical young cluster with an age of 3 million years. note that the high-mass (high-luminosity) stars have already arrived at the main-sequence stage of their lives, while the lower-mass (lower-luminosity) stars are still contracting toward the zero-age main sequence (the red line) and are not yet hot enough to derive all of their energy from the fusion of hydrogen. there are real star clusters that fit this description. the first to be studied (in about 1950) was ngc 2264, which is still associated with the region of gas and dust from which it was born (figure 22.9). figure 22.9 young cluster ngc 2264.
located about 2600 light-years from us, this region of newly formed stars, known as the christmas tree cluster, is a complex mixture of hydrogen gas (which is ionized by hot embedded stars and shown in red), dark obscuring dust lanes, and brilliant young stars. the image shows a scene about 30 light-years across. (credit: eso) the ngc 2264 cluster’s h–r diagram is shown in figure 22.10. the cluster in the middle of the orion nebula (shown in figure 21.4 and figure 21.5) is in a similar stage of evolution. 752 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page770_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page770_img2.jpeg] figure 22.10 ngc 2264 h–r diagram. compare this h–r diagram to that in figure 22.8; although the points scatter a bit more here, the theoretical and observational diagrams are remarkably, and satisfyingly, similar. as clusters get older, their h–r diagrams begin to change.
after a short time (less than a million years after they reach the main sequence), the most massive stars use up the hydrogen in their cores and evolve off the main sequence to become red giants and supergiants. as more time passes, stars of lower mass begin to leave the main sequence and make their way to the upper right of the h–r diagram. to see the evolution of a star cluster in a dwarf galaxy, you can watch this brief animation (https://openstax.org/l/30starcluster) of how its h–r diagram changes. figure 22.11 is a photograph of ngc 3293, a cluster that is about 10 million years old. the dense clouds of gas and dust are gone. one massive star has evolved to become a red giant and stands out as an especially bright orange member of the cluster. link to learning 22.3 • checking out the theory 753 [image: astronomy_openstax_page771_img1.jpeg] figure 22.11 ngc 3293. all the stars in an open star cluster like ngc 3293 form at about the same time. the most massive stars, however, exhaust their nuclear fuel more rapidly and hence evolve more quickly than stars of low mass.