radar transmits radio waves in the direction of an object. they bounce off that object and return in our direction. since we know that radio waves travel at the speed of light, we can calculate the distance based on how long it takes the signal to return. in astronomy, radar will work for distances out to about ten au. this would be a circle centered on the earth reaching to saturn. mercury, venus, mars, and sometimes jupiter are within the circle and we would are able to measure their distances from earth. stellar parallax. stellar parallax is based on a technique that we use on earth to measure long distances in surveying: triangulation. triangulation and stellar parallax use trigonometry to measure the distance to a far object based on a measured baseline distance and a measured angle. figure 142: using radar in the solar system figure 143: triangulation [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page106_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page106_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 107 stellar parallax, or simply parallax, uses the mathematics of triangulation.
we can measure the distance to a distant object by taking a measurement of the angular displacement of a near object relative to the background stars. we measure the angular difference in the sky based on the background stars from two observations. the observations are made from opposite sides of the earth’s orbit, so the baseline distance is 1 au. (we will use only half of the parallax angle measured.) the larger the baseline the more accurately we can measure the angle. the baseline is half the distance between the two observing locations: b. example 2: triangulation we see a tree, and we want to know the height of the tree. rather than climb the tree with a long tape measure, we will use triangulation to determine its height. we measure the distance from the tree to where we will stand. this is the baseline. assume that this is 100 feet. we next measure the angular height of the tree from the horizon to its top.
𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡(𝐴𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒) = 𝑂𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑒 𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒 𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒 𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒 𝑂𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑒 𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒 (𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑒′𝑠 𝐻𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡) = 𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡(𝐴𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒) ∗𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒 𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒 if the measured angle is 60°, then: 𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡(60) = 1.7325.
the tree’s height = 1.7325 * 100 feet = 173 feet, 3 inches example 3: parallax [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page107_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 108 the distance to the object is the distance from the sun to the object: d. the red parallax angle was measured (p). the green parallax angle is equal to the red one. note: the human eyes, at about 3 inches apart, are capable of doing parallax out to about 600 feet. beyond the solar system as we move beyond the solar system, we need to employ new tools to increase the distances we can measure. we can still use stellar parallax to reach the closer stars, but to reach more distant stars and other deep space objects we need to use: spectroscopic parallax, cepheid variables, the tully-fisher relation, type ia supernovae, and hubble’s law. spectroscopic parallax. spectroscopic parallax has nothing to do with the parallax related to triangulation.