the lucy mission is named for a noted fossilized skeleton of a human ancestor found in 1974, which, in turn, derived its name from the beatles song "lucy in the sky with diamonds." interstellar visitors in late 2017, something entirely new was discovered: an interstellar asteroid. this visitor was found at a distance of 33 million kilometers with a survey telescope on haleakala, hawaii. as astronomers followed up on the discovery, it quickly became apparent that this asteroid was travelling far too fast to be part of the sun’s family. its orbit is a hyperbola, and when discovered it was already rapidly leaving the inner solar system. although it was too distant for imaging by even large telescopes, its size and shape could be estimated from its brightness and rapid light fluctuations. it is highly elongated, with an approximately cylindrical shape. the nominal dimensions are about 200 meters in length and only 35 meters across, the most extreme of any natural object. large objects, like planets and moons, are pulled by their own gravity into roughly spherical shapes, and even small asteroids and comets (often described as “potato-shaped”) rarely have irregularities of more than a factor of two.
this asteroid was named ‘oumuamua, a hawaiian word meaning “scout” or “first to reach out.” in a way, the discovery of an interstellar asteroid or comet was not unexpected. early in solar system history, before the 13.1 • asteroids 445 [image: astronomy_openstax_page463_img1.jpeg] planet orbits sorted themselves into stable, non-intersecting paths all in the same plane, we estimate that quite a lot of mass was ejected, either whole planets or more numerous smaller fragments. even today, an occasional comet coming in from the outer edges of the solar system can have its orbit changed by gravitational interaction with jupiter and the sun, and some of these escape on hyperbolic trajectories. in 2019, astronomers discovered an interstellar comet entering our solar system—more on this in the section on comets. as we have recently learned that planetary systems are common, the question became: where are similar debris objects ejected from other planetary systems? now we have found two, and improved surveys will soon add others to this category.
view an artist’s rendering of the asteroid ‘oumuamua (https://www.openstax.org/l/30oumuamua) (https://www.openstax.org/l/30oumuamua) by the eso. although it was not close enough to earth to be imaged, its long slender shape was indicated by its rapid variation in brightness as it rotated. the space agencies involved with the dawn mission have produced nice animated “flyover” videos of vesta (https://openstax.org/l/30vestaflyover) and ceres (https://openstax.org/l/30ceresflyover) available online. 13.2 asteroids and planetary defense learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: not all asteroids are in the main asteroid belt. in this section, we consider some special groups of asteroids with orbits that approach or cross the orbit of earth. these pose the risk of a catastrophic collision with our planet, such as the collision 65 million years ago that killed the dinosaurs. earth-approaching asteroids asteroids that stray far outside the main belt are of interest mostly to astronomers.
but asteroids that come inward, especially those with orbits that come close to or cross the orbit of earth, are of interest to political leaders, military planners—indeed, everyone alive on earth. some of these asteroids briefly become the closest celestial object to us. in 1994, a 1-kilometer object was picked up passing closer than the moon, causing a stir of interest in the news media. today, it is routine to read of small asteroids coming this close to earth. (they were always there, but only in recent years have astronomers been able to detect such faint objects.) in 2013, a small asteroid hit our planet, streaking across the sky over the russian city of chelyabinsk and exploding with the energy of a nuclear bomb (figure 13.13). the impactor was a stony object about 20 meters in diameter, exploding about 30 kilometers high with an energy of 500 kilotons (about 30 times larger than the nuclear bombs dropped on japan in world war ii). no one was hurt by the blast itself, although it briefly became as bright as the sun, drawing many spectators to the windows in their offices and homes.