a typical neutron star would be approximately 12 miles in diameter. this means it would fit inside of houston’s i-610 inner highway loop. because of their small size and heavy mass, the gravity near the surface of a neutron star is immense. the angular momentum of the original star’s core is largely preserved as the core contracts. as it contracts and the diameter shrinks, the rotation speed increases to maintain angular momentum. this is the same action you see in figure skating. if the skater is in a spin with arms outstretched, the rotational speed increases as the arms are brought inward. this means that a star that originally was spinning about once every 7 days would be rotating as a neutron star at a rate of one rotation per second. neutron stars have very strong magnetic fields. they may be trillions of times stronger than the earth’s magnetic field. this is also a function of the collapse of the core. as the core shrinks, the magnetic field lines of the star are compressed. the first visually observed neutron star is shown in figure 344. it is rx j185635-3754 which is about 400 light-years away from earth and formed approximately one million years ago.
there are approximately 2000 known neutron stars in the milky way galaxy. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page301_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 302 figure 346: crab nebula pulsar figure 345: vela pulsar figure 347: pulsar components diagram by mysid component 134 – pulsars because of the rapid rotation and strong magnetic fields of neutron stars, the magnetic field lines are tightly wrapped around each other at the north and south magnetic poles. figure 345 and figure 346 are images taken of two pulsars. in both cases a jet of high energy electromagnetic radiation can clearly be seen radiating from the center of the cloud. (see the diagram in figure 347.) if the magnetic axis is not the same as the rotation axis, due to the neutron star’s rotation, the direction that this jet is pointing orbits around the pole. if earth is somewhere along the circle that the magnetic pole faces in the sky, then the earth will see a flash of the electromagnetic radiation every time the neutron star rotates. this is the “pulse” of the pulsar. this provides a very accurate rotational period.
most pulsars have a frequency of between 3 and 30 pulses per second. there are over 1,500 known pulsars that have been identified in the milky way galaxy. it is believed that the jets weaken over time, and after a few tens of millions of years the pulse may no longer be detectable. in the 1980s a new type of pulsar was discovered. they rotate extremely rapidly, with a period of only milliseconds. these are called millisecond pulsars and approximately 250 are known in our galaxy. the currently accepted theory for how this could be possible is that the neutron star is part of a binary star system. its companion star has been sharing material with the neutron star. as this material spirals into the neutron star, its angular momentum is added to the neutron star’s angular momentum, and the neutron star spins faster.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page302_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page302_img2.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page302_img3.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 303 figure 348: gamma ray burst locations component 135 – gamma ray bursts a gamma ray burst is one of the most energetic bursts of electromagnetic radiation ever detected. these bursts can be as short as 10 milliseconds, or they can last as long as several hours. the sources for these bursts appear to be billions of light-years from earth. this means that they are quite distant, but also must be very strong. history of gamma ray bursts gamma ray bursts were first detected in 1967 by vela satellites. a survey of the entire sky was done by the compton gamma ray observatory using its very sensitive burst and transient source explorer instrument. the results of the survey can be seen in figure 348. the data from over 2700 bursts show that there is no increase in activity where the milky way galaxy is in the picture, so the sources must be outside of the galaxy. in 1997 the first measurement of the distance to a gamma ray burst was done.