we humans take it for granted that plenty of free oxygen is available in earth’s atmosphere, and we use it to release energy from the food we take in. although it may seem funny to think of it this way, we are lifeforms that have evolved to breathe in the waste product of plants. it is plants and related microbes that are the primary producers, using sunlight to create energy-rich “food” for the rest of us. on a planetary scale, one of the consequences of life has been a decrease in atmospheric carbon dioxide. in the absence of life, earth would probably have an atmosphere dominated by co2, like mars or venus. but living things, in combination with high levels of geological activity, have effectively stripped our atmosphere of most of this gas. the greenhouse effect and global warming we have a special interest in the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere because of the key role this gas plays in retaining heat from the sun through a process called the greenhouse effect. to understand how the greenhouse effect works, consider the fate of sunlight that strikes the surface of earth. the light penetrates our atmosphere, is absorbed by the ground, and heats the surface layers.
at the temperature of earth’s surface, that energy is then reemitted as infrared or heat radiation (figure 8.17). however, the molecules of our atmosphere, which allow visible light through, are good at absorbing infrared energy. as a result, co2 (along with methane and water vapor) acts like a blanket, trapping heat in the atmosphere and impeding its flow back to space. to maintain an energy balance, the temperature of the surface and lower atmosphere must increase until the total energy radiated by earth to space equals the energy received from the sun. the more co2 there is in our atmosphere, the higher the temperature at which earth’s surface reaches a new balance. figure 8.17 how the greenhouse effect works. sunlight that penetrates to earth’s lower atmosphere and surface is reradiated as infrared or heat radiation, which is trapped by greenhouse gases such as water vapor, methane, and co2 in the atmosphere. the result is a higher surface temperature for our planet. the greenhouse effect in a planetary atmosphere is similar to the heating of a gardener’s greenhouse or the inside of a car left out in the sun with the windows rolled up.
in these examples, the window glass plays the role of greenhouse gases, letting sunlight in but reducing the outward flow of heat radiation. as a result, a greenhouse or car interior winds up much hotter than would be expected from the heating of sunlight alone. on earth, the current greenhouse effect elevates the surface temperature by about 23 °c. without this 274 8 • earth as a planet access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page292_img1.jpeg] greenhouse effect, the average surface temperature would be well below freezing and earth would be locked in a global ice age. that’s the good news; the bad news is that the heating due to the greenhouse effect is increasing. modern industrial society depends on energy extracted from burning fossil fuels. in effect, we are exploiting the energy-rich material created by photosynthesis tens of millions of years ago. as these ancient coal and oil deposits are oxidized (burned using oxygen), large quantities of carbon dioxide are released into the atmosphere. the problem is exacerbated by the widespread destruction of tropical forests, which we depend on to extract co2 from the atmosphere and replenish our supply of oxygen.
in the past century of increased industrial and agricultural development, the amount of co2 in the atmosphere increased by about 30% and continues to rise at more than 0.5% per year. before the end of the present century, earth’s co2 level is predicted to reach twice the value it had before the industrial revolution (figure 8.18). the consequences of such an increase for earth’s surface and atmosphere (and the creatures who live there) are likely to be complex changes in climate, and may be catastrophic for many species. many groups of scientists are now studying the effects of such global warming with elaborate computer models, and climate change has emerged as the greatest known threat (barring nuclear war) to both industrial civilization and the ecology of our planet. figure 8.18 increase of atmospheric carbon dioxide over time. scientists expect that the amount of co2 will double its preindustrial level before the end of the twenty-first century. measurements of the isotopic signatures of this added co2 demonstrate that it is mostly coming from burning fossil fuels. (credit: modification of work by noaa) this short pbs video (https://openstax.org/l/30pbsgreengas) explains the physics of the greenhouse effect.