from left to right, we first cross a region of “badlands” with some craters showing, and then move across a wide range of mountains made of water ice and coated with the redder material we saw in the previous image. then, at right, we arrive at the “shoreline” of the great sea of frozen nitrogen that the mission scientists have named the “sputnik plains.” this nitrogen sea is divided into mysterious cells or segments that are many kilometers across. (credit: modification of work by nasa/johns hopkins university applied physics laboratory/southwest research institute) figure 12.23 shows another view of the boundary between different types of geology. the width of this image is 250 kilometers, and it shows dark, ancient, heavily cratered terrain; dark, uncratered terrain with a hilly surface; smooth, geologically young terrain; and a small cluster of mountains more than 3000 meters high. in the best images, the light areas of nitrogen ice seem to have flowed much like glaciers on earth, covering some of the older terrain underneath them.
the isolated mountains in the midst of the smooth nitrogen plains are probably also made of water ice, which is very hard at the temperatures on pluto and can float on frozen nitrogen. additional mountains, and some hilly terrain that reminded the mission scientists of snakeskin, are visible in part (b) of figure 12.23. figure 12.23 diversity of terrains on pluto. (a) in this photo, about 250 kilometers across, we can see many different kinds of terrain. at the bottom are older, cratered highlands; a v-shaped region of hills without cratering points toward the bottom of the image. surrounding the v-shaped dark region is the smooth, brighter frozen nitrogen plain, acting as glaciers on earth do. some isolated mountains, made of frozen water ice, are floating in the nitrogen near the top of the picture. (b) this scene is about 390 kilometers across. the rounded mountains, quite different from those we know on earth, are named tartarus dorsa. the patterns, made of repeating ridges with the more reddish terrain between them, are not yet understood.
(credit a, b: modification of work by nasa/johns hopkins university applied physics laboratory/southwest research institute) a quick look at charon to add to the mysteries of pluto, we show in figure 12.24 one of the best new horizons images of pluto’s large moon charon. recall from earlier that charon is roughly half pluto’s size (its diameter is about the size of texas). charon keeps the same side toward pluto, just as our moon keeps the same side toward earth. what is unique about the pluto-charon system, however, is that pluto also keeps its same face toward charon. like two dancers embracing, these two constantly face each other as they spin across the celestial dance floor. astronomers call this a double tidal lock. 12.4 • pluto and charon 415 [image: astronomy_openstax_page433_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page433_img2.jpeg] figure 12.24 pluto’s large moon charon. (a) in this new horizons image, the color has been enhanced to bring out the color of the moon’s strange red polar cap.
charon has a diameter of 1214 kilometers, and the resolution of this image is 3 kilometers. (b) here we see the moon from a slightly different angle, in true color. the inset shows an area about 390 kilometers from top to bottom. near the top left is an intriguing feature—what appears to be a mountain in the middle of a depression or moat. (credit a, b: modification of work by nasa/jhuapl/swri) what new horizons showed was another complex world. there are scattered craters in the lower part of the image, but much of the rest of the surface appears smooth. crossing the center of the image is a belt of rough terrain, including what appear to be tectonic valleys, as if some forces had tried to split charon apart. topping off this strange image is a distinctly red polar cap, of unknown composition. many features on charon are not yet understood, including what appears to be a mountain in the midst of a low-elevation region.