a visual representation of the sun’s magnetic fields, called a magnetogram, can be used to see the relationship 15.2 • the solar cycle 523 [image: astronomy_openstax_page541_img1.jpeg] between sunspots and the sun’s magnetic field (figure 15.16). figure 15.16 magnetogram and solar cycle. in the image on the left, called a magnetogram, we see the magnetic polarity of sunspots. the black areas are where the magnetism is pointing toward the sun’s core, whereas the white regions are where it is pointing away from the core, toward us. this dramatic sequence on the right shows the activity cycle of the sun. the 10 maps of the magnetic field on the surface of the sun span a period of 7.5 years. the two magnetic polarities (n and s) of the magnetic field are shown against a blue disk as dark blue to black (n) and as light blue to white (s). the earliest image, taken on january 8, 1992, is at the lower left and was taken just after solar maximum. each image, from left to right around the arc, was taken one-half to one year after the preceding one.
the last image was taken on july 25, 1999, as the sun was approaching the next solar maximum. note a few striking patterns in the magnetic maps: the direction from white to black polarity in the southern hemisphere is opposite from that in the northern hemisphere. (credit left: modification of work by nasa/sdo; credit right: modification of work by nasa/soho) why is the sun such a strong and complicated magnet? astronomers have found that it is the sun’s dynamo that generates the magnetic field. a dynamo is a machine that converts kinetic energy (i.e., the energy of motion) into electricity. on earth, dynamos are found in power plants where, for example, the energy from wind or flowing water is used to cause turbines to rotate. in the sun, the source of kinetic energy is the churning of turbulent layers of ionized gas within the sun’s interior that we mentioned earlier. these generate electric currents—moving electrons—which in turn generate magnetic fields. most solar researchers agree that the solar dynamo is located in the convection zone or in the interface layer between the convection zone and the radiative zone below it.
as the magnetic fields from the sun’s dynamo interact, they break, reconnect, and rise through the sun’s surface. we should say that, although we have good observations that show us how the sun changes during each solar cycle, it is still very difficult to build physical models of something as complicated as the sun that can account satisfactorily for why it changes. researchers have not yet developed a generally accepted model that describes in detail the physical processes that control the solar cycle. calculations do show that differential rotation (the idea that the sun rotates at different rates at different latitudes) and convection just below the solar surface can twist and distort the magnetic fields. this causes them to grow and then decay, regenerating with opposite polarity approximately every 11 years. the calculations also show that as the fields grow stronger near solar maximum, they flow from the interior of the sun toward its surface in the form of loops. when a large loop emerges from the solar surface, it creates regions of sunspot activity (figure 15.17). 524 15 • the sun: a garden-variety star access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page542_img1.jpeg] figure 15.17 magnetic field lines wind up.
because the sun spins faster at the equator than near the poles, the magnetic fields in the sun tend to wind up as shown, and after a while make loops. this is an idealized diagram; the real situation is much more complex. this idea of magnetic loops offers a natural explanation of why the leading and trailing sunspots in an active region have opposite polarity. the leading sunspot coincides with one end of the loop and the trailing spot with the other end. magnetic fields also hold the key to explaining why sunspots are cooler and darker than the regions without strong magnetic fields. the forces produced by the magnetic field resist the motions of the bubbling columns of rising hot gases. since these columns carry most of the heat from inside the sun to the surface by means of convection, and strong magnetic fields inhibit this convection, the surface of the sun is allowed to cool. as a result, these regions are seen as darker, cooler sunspots.