jupiter and saturn are so large that the gas is compressed in their interior until the hydrogen becomes a liquid. because the bulk of both planets consists of compressed, liquefied hydrogen, we should really call them liquid planets. under the force of gravity, the heavier elements sink toward the inner parts of a liquid or gaseous planet. both jupiter and saturn, therefore, have cores composed of heavier rock, metal, and ice, but we cannot see these regions directly. in fact, when we look down from above, all we see is the atmosphere with its swirling clouds (figure 7.11). we must infer the existence of the denser core inside these planets from studies of each planet’s gravity. figure 7.11 jupiter. this true-color image of jupiter was taken from the cassini spacecraft in 2000. the dark spot is the shadow of one of the giant planet’s moons.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl/university of arizona) describe the characteristics of the giant planets, terrestrial planets, and small bodies in the solar system explain what influences the temperature of a planet’s surface explain why there is geological activity on some planets and not on others 7.2 • composition and structure of planets 237 [image: astronomy_openstax_page255_img1.jpeg] uranus and neptune are much smaller than jupiter and saturn, but each also has a core of rock, metal, and ice. uranus and neptune were less efficient at attracting hydrogen and helium gas, so they have much smaller atmospheres in proportion to their cores. chemically, each giant planet is dominated by hydrogen and its many compounds. nearly all the oxygen present is combined chemically with hydrogen to form water (h2o). chemists call such a hydrogen-dominated composition reduced. throughout the outer solar system, we find abundant water (mostly in the form of ice) and reducing chemistry. the terrestrial planets the terrestrial planets are quite different from the giants. in addition to being much smaller, they are composed primarily of rocks and metals. these, in turn, are made of elements that are less common in the universe as a whole.
the most abundant rocks, called silicates, are made of silicon and oxygen, and the most common metal is iron. we can tell from their densities (see table 7.2) that mercury has the greatest proportion of metals (which are denser) and the moon has the lowest. earth, venus, and mars all have roughly similar bulk compositions: about one third of their mass consists of iron-nickel or iron-sulfur combinations; two thirds is made of silicates. because these planets are largely composed of oxygen compounds (such as the silicate minerals of their crusts), their chemistry is said to be oxidized. when we look at the internal structure of each of the terrestrial planets, we find that the densest metals are in a central core, with the lighter silicates near the surface. if these planets were liquid, like the giant planets, we could understand this effect as the result the sinking of heavier elements due to the pull of gravity. this leads us to conclude that, although the terrestrial planets are solid today, at one time they must have been hot enough to melt. differentiation is the process by which gravity helps separate a planet’s interior into layers of different compositions and densities.
the heavier metals sink to form a core, while the lightest minerals float to the surface to form a crust. later, when the planet cools, this layered structure is preserved. in order for a rocky planet to differentiate, it must be heated to the melting point of rocks, which is typically more than 1300 k. moons, asteroids, and comets chemically and structurally, earth’s moon is like the terrestrial planets, but most moons are in the outer solar system, and they have compositions similar to the cores of the giant planets around which they orbit. the three largest moons—ganymede and callisto in the jovian system, and titan in the saturnian system—are composed half of frozen water, and half of rocks and metals. most of these moons differentiated during formation, and today they have cores of rock and metal, with upper layers and crusts of very cold and—thus very hard—ice (figure 7.12). 238 7 • other worlds: an introduction to the solar system access for free at openstax.org figure 7.12 ganymede. this view of jupiter’s moon ganymede was taken in june 1996 by the galileo spacecraft.