hubble’s law tells us something fundamental about the universe. since all but the nearest galaxies appear to be in motion away from us, with the most distant ones moving the fastest, we must be living in an expanding universe. we will explore the implications of this idea shortly, as well as in the final chapters of this text. for now, we will just say that hubble’s observation underlies all our theories about the origin and evolution of the universe. hubble’s law and distances the regularity expressed in hubble’s law has a built-in bonus: it gives us a new way to determine the distances to remote galaxies. first, we must reliably establish hubble’s constant by measuring both the distance and the astronomy basics 1 in 2020, the international astronomical union suggested that it would be more fair to call it the hubble-lemaitre law. in telling the history in this textbook, we have acknowledged the role lemaître played, and we urge our readers to keep his contributions in mind as they read on. 916 26 • galaxies access for free at openstax.org velocity of many galaxies in many directions to be sure hubble’s law is truly a universal property of galaxies.
but once we have calculated the value of this constant and are satisfied that it applies everywhere, much more of the universe opens up for distance determination. basically, if we can obtain a spectrum of a galaxy, we can immediately tell how far away it is. the procedure works like this. we use the spectrum to measure the speed with which the galaxy is moving away from us. if we then put this speed and the hubble constant into hubble’s law equation, we can solve for the distance. e x a m p l e 2 6 . 1 hubble’s law hubble’s law (v = h × d) allows us to calculate the distance to any galaxy. here is how we use it in practice. we have measured hubble’s constant to be 22 km/s per million light-years. this means that if a galaxy is 1 million light-years farther away, it will move away 22 km/s faster. so, if we find a galaxy that is moving away at 18,000 km/s, what does hubble’s law tells us about the distance to the galaxy?
solution note how we handled the units here: the km/s in the numerator and denominator cancel, and the factor of million light-years in the denominator of the constant must be divided correctly before we get our distance of 818 million light-years. check your learning using 22 km/s/million light-years for hubble’s constant, what recessional velocity do we expect to find if we observe a galaxy at 500 million light-years? answer: variation of hubble’s constant the use of redshift is potentially a very important technique for determining distances because as we have seen, most of our methods for determining galaxy distances are limited to approximately the nearest few hundred million light-years (and they have large uncertainties at these distances). the use of hubble’s law as a distance indicator requires only a spectrum of a galaxy and a measurement of the doppler shift, and with large telescopes and modern spectrographs, spectra can be taken of extremely faint galaxies. but, as is often the case in science, things are not so simple. this technique works if, and only if, the hubble constant has been truly constant throughout the entire life of the universe. when we observe galaxies billions of light-years away, we are seeing them as they were billions of years ago.
what if the hubble “constant” was different billions of years ago? before 1998, astronomers thought that, although the universe is expanding, the expansion should be slowing down, or decelerating, because the overall gravitational pull of all matter in the universe would have a dominant, measureable effect. if the expansion is decelerating, then the hubble constant should be decreasing over time. the discovery that type ia supernovae are standard bulbs gave astronomers the tool they needed to observe 26.5 • the expanding universe 917 extremely distant galaxies and measure the rate of expansion billions of years ago. the results were completely unexpected. it turns out that the expansion of the universe is accelerating over time! what makes this result so astounding is that there is no way that existing physical theories can account for this observation. while a decelerating universe could easily be explained by gravity, there was no force or property in the universe known to astronomers that could account for the acceleration. in the big bang chapter, we will look in more detail at the observations that led to this totally unexpected result and explore its implications for the ultimate fate of the universe.