the other main source of radio emission is from electrons moving at high speed in regions with strong magnetic fields. the bright thin arcs and “threads” on the figure show us where this type of emission is produced. describe the radio and x-ray observations that indicate energetic phenomena are occurring at the galactic center explain what has been revealed by high-resolution near-infrared imaging of the galactic center discuss how these near-infrared images, when combined with kepler’s third law of motion, can be used to derive the mass of the central gravitating object 25.4 • the center of the galaxy 877 figure 25.14 radio image of galactic center region. this radio map of the center of the galaxy (at a wavelength of 90 centimeters) was constructed from data obtained with the very large array (vla) of radio telescopes in socorro, new mexico. brighter regions are more intense in radio waves. the galactic center is inside the region labeled sagittarius a. sagittarius b1 and b2 are regions of active star formation. many filaments or threadlike features are seen, as well as a number of shells (labeled snr), which are supernova remnants.
the scale bar at the bottom left is about 240 light-years long. notice that radio astronomers also give fanciful animal names to some of the structures, much as visible-light nebulae are sometimes given the names of animals they resemble. (credit: modification of work by n. e. kassim, d. s. briggs, t. j. w. lazio, t. n. larosa, and j. imamura (nrl/rsd)) now let’s focus in on the central region using a more energetic form of electromagnetic radiation. figure 25.15 shows the x-ray emission from a smaller region 400 light-years wide and 900 light-years across centered in sagittarius a*. seen in this picture are hundreds of hot white dwarfs, neutron stars, and stellar black holes with accretion disks glowing with x-rays. the diffuse haze in the picture is emission from gas that lies among the stars and is at a temperature of 10 million k. figure 25.15 galactic center in x-rays.
this artificial-color mosaic of 30 images taken with the chandra x-ray satellite shows a region 400 × 900 light-years in extent and centered on sagittarius a*, the bright white source in the center of the picture. the x-ray- emitting point sources are white dwarfs, neutron stars, and stellar black holes. the diffuse “haze” is emission from gas at a temperature of 10 million k. this hot gas is flowing away from the center out into the rest of the galaxy. the colors indicate x-ray energy bands: red (low energy), green (medium energy), and blue (high energy). (credit: modification of work by nasa/cxc/ umass/ 878 25 • the milky way galaxy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page896_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page896_img2.jpeg] d. wang et al.) as we approach the center of the galaxy, we find the supermassive black hole sagittarius a*. there are also thousands of stars within a few lightyears of sagittarius a*. most of these are old, reddish main-sequence stars.
but there are also about a hundred hot ob stars that must have formed within the last few million years. there is as yet no good explanation for how stars could have formed recently so close to a supermassive black hole. perhaps they formed in a dense cluster of stars that was originally at a larger distance from the black hole and subsequently migrated closer. there is currently no star formation at the galactic center, but there is lots of dust and molecular gas that is revolving around the black hole, along with some ionized gas streamers that are heated by the hot stars. figure 25.16 is a radio map that shows these gas streamers. figure 25.16 sagittarius a. this image, taken with the very large array of radio telescopes, shows the radio emission from hot, ionized gas in the center of the milky way. the lines slanting across the top of the image are gas streamers. sagittarius a* is the bright spot in the lower right. (credit: modification of work by farhad zadeh et al. (northwestern), vla, nrao) finding the heart of the galaxy just what is sagittarius a*, which lies right at the center our galaxy?