before dawn on february 24, ian shelton, a canadian astronomer working at an observatory in chile, pulled a photographic plate from the developer. two nights earlier, he had begun a survey of the large magellanic cloud, a small galaxy that is one of the milky way’s nearest neighbors in space. where he expected to see only faint stars, he saw a large bright spot. concerned that his photograph was flawed, shelton went outside to look at the large magellanic cloud . . . and saw that a new object had indeed appeared in the sky (see figure 23.11). he soon realized that he had discovered a supernova, one that could be seen with the unaided eye even though it was about 160,000 light-years away. 792 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page810_img1.jpeg] figure 23.11 hubble space telescope image of sn 1987a. the supernova remnant with its inner and outer red rings of material is located in the large magellanic cloud.
this image is a composite of several images taken in 1994, 1996, and 1997—about a decade after supernova 1987a was first observed. (credit: modification of work by the hubble heritage team (aura/stsci/nasa/esa)) now known as sn 1987a, since it was the first supernova discovered in 1987, this brilliant newcomer to the southern sky gave astronomers their first opportunity to study the death of a relatively nearby star with modern instruments. it was also the first time astronomers had observed a star before it became a supernova. the star that blew up had been included in earlier surveys of the large magellanic cloud, and as a result, we know the star was a blue supergiant just before the explosion. by combining theory and observations at many different wavelengths, astronomers have reconstructed the life story of the star that became sn 1987a. formed about 10 million years ago, it originally had a mass of about 20 msun. for 90% of its life, it lived quietly on the main sequence, converting hydrogen into helium.
at this time, its luminosity was about 60,000 times that of the sun (lsun), and its spectral type was o. when the hydrogen in the center of the star was exhausted, the core contracted and ultimately became hot enough to fuse helium. by this time, the star was a red supergiant, emitting about 100,000 times more energy than the sun. while in this stage, the star lost some of its mass. this lost material has actually been detected by observations with the hubble space telescope (figure 23.12). the gas driven out into space by the subsequent supernova explosion is currently colliding with the material the star left behind when it was a red giant. as the two collide, we see a glowing ring. figure 23.12 ring around supernova 1987a. these two images show a ring of gas expelled by a red giant star about 30,000 years before the star exploded and was observed as supernova 1987a.
the supernova, which has been artificially dimmed, is located at the 23.3 • supernova observations 793 [image: astronomy_openstax_page811_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page811_img2.jpeg] center of the ring. the left-hand image was taken in 1997 and the right-hand image in 2003. note that the number of bright spots has increased from 1 to more than 15 over this time interval. these spots occur where high-speed gas ejected by the supernova and moving at millions of miles per hour has reached the ring and blasted into it. the collision has heated the gas in the ring and caused it to glow more brightly. the fact that we see individual spots suggests that material ejected by the supernova is first hitting narrow, inward-projecting columns of gas in the clumpy ring. the hot spots are the first signs of a dramatic and violent collision between the new and old material that will continue over the next few years. by studying these bright spots, astronomers can determine the composition of the ring and hence learn about the nuclear processes that build heavy elements inside massive stars. (credit: modification of work by nasa, p. challis, r.