342 10 • earthlike planets: venus and mars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page360_img1.jpeg] figure 10.22 water frost in utopia. this image of surface frost was photographed at the viking 2 landing site during late winter. (credit: nasa/jpl) most of the winds measured on mars are only a few kilometers per hour. however, mars is capable of great windstorms that can shroud the entire planet with windblown dust. such high winds can strip the surface of some of its loose, fine dust, leaving the rock exposed. the later rovers found that each sunny afternoon the atmosphere became turbulent as heat rose off the surface. this turbulence generated dust devils, which play an important role in lifting the fine dust into the atmosphere. as the dust devils strip off the top layer of light dust and expose darker material underneath, they can produce fantastic patterns on the ground (figure 10.23). wind on mars plays an important role in redistributing surface material. figure 10.23 shows a beautiful area of dark sand dunes on top of lighter material.
much of the material stripped out of the martian canyons has been dumped in extensive dune fields like this, mostly at high latitudes. figure 10.23 dust devil tracks and sand dunes. (a) this high-resolution photo from the mars global surveyor shows the dark tracks of several dust devils that have stripped away a thin coating of light-colored dust. this view is of an area about 3 kilometers 10.4 • the geology of mars 343 [image: astronomy_openstax_page361_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page361_img2.jpeg] across. dust devils are one of the most important ways that dust gets redistributed by the martian winds. they may also help keep the solar panels of our rovers free of dust. (b) these windblown sand dunes on mars overlay a lighter sandy surface. each dune in this high-resolution view is about 1 kilometer across.
(credit a: modification of work by nasa/jpl/university of arizona; credit b: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/university of arizona) 10.5 water and life on mars learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: of all the planets and moons in the solar system, mars seems to be the most promising place to look for life, both fossil microbes and (we hope) some forms of life deeper underground that still survive today. but where (and how) should we look for life? we know that the one requirement shared by all life on earth is liquid water. therefore, the guiding principle in assessing habitability on mars and elsewhere has been to “follow the water.” that is the perspective we take in this section, to follow the water on the red planet and hope it will lead us to life. atmosphere and clouds on mars the atmosphere of mars today has an average surface pressure of only 0.007 bar, less than 1% that of earth. (this is how thin the air is about 30 kilometers above earth’s surface.) martian air is composed primarily of carbon dioxide (95%), with about 3% nitrogen and 2% argon.
the proportions of different gases are similar to those in the atmosphere of venus (see table 10.2), but a lot less of each gas is found in the thin air on mars. while winds on mars can reach high speeds, they exert much less force than wind of the same velocity would on earth because the atmosphere is so thin. the wind is able, however, to loft very fine dust particles, which can sometimes develop planet-wide dust storms. it is this fine dust that coats almost all the surface, giving mars its distinctive red color. in the absence of surface water, wind erosion plays a major role in sculpting the martian surface (figure 10.24). figure 10.24 wind erosion on mars. these long straight ridges, called yardangs, are aligned with the dominant wind direction. this is a high-resolution image from the mars reconnaissance orbiter and is about 1 kilometer wide.