(credit: adam evans) at distances of 10 to 15 million light-years, we find other small galaxy groups, and then at about 50 million light-years there are more impressive systems with thousands of member galaxies. we have discovered that galaxies occur mostly in clusters, both large and small (figure 1.14). 1.7 • the universe on the large scale 25 [image: astronomy_openstax_page43_img1.jpeg] figure 1.14 cluster of galaxies. this image shows part of a rich cluster of galaxies some 4 billion light-years away. nicknamed pandora's cluster, the grouping consists of many galaxies, each with billions of stars in them. (credit: nasa, esa, and j. lotz, m. mountain, a. koekemoer, and the hff team (stsci)) some of the clusters themselves form into larger groups called superclusters. the local group is part of a supercluster of galaxies, called the virgo supercluster, which stretches over a diameter of 110 million light- years. we are just beginning to explore the structure of the universe at these enormous scales and are already encountering some unexpected findings.
at even greater distances, where many ordinary galaxies are too dim to see, we find quasars. these are brilliant centers of galaxies, glowing with the light of an extraordinarily energetic process. the enormous energy of the quasars is produced by gas that is heated to a temperature of millions of degrees as it falls toward a massive black hole and swirls around it. the brilliance of quasars makes them the most distant beacons we can see in the dark oceans of space. they allow us to probe the universe 10 billion light-years away or more, and thus 10 billion years or more in the past. with quasars we can see way back close to the big bang explosion that marks the beginning of time. beyond the quasars and the most distant visible galaxies, we have detected the feeble glow of the explosion itself, filling the universe and thus coming to us from all directions in space. the discovery of this “afterglow of creation” is considered to be one of the most significant events in twentieth-century science, and we are still exploring the many things it has to tell us about the earliest times of the universe.
measurements of the properties of galaxies and quasars in remote locations require large telescopes, 26 1 • science and the universe: a brief tour access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page44_img1.jpeg] sophisticated light-amplifying devices, and painstaking labor. every clear night, at observatories around the world, astronomers and students are at work on such mysteries as the birth of new stars and the large-scale structure of the universe, fitting their results into the tapestry of our understanding. 1.8 the universe of the very small the foregoing discussion has likely impressed on you that the universe is extraordinarily large and extraordinarily empty. on average, it is 10,000 times more empty than our galaxy. yet, as we have seen, even the galaxy is mostly empty space. the air we breathe has about 1019 atoms in each cubic centimeter—and we usually think of air as empty space. in the interstellar gas of the galaxy, there is about one atom in every cubic centimeter. intergalactic space is filled so sparsely that to find one atom, on average, we must search through a cubic meter of space.
most of the universe is fantastically empty; places that are dense, such as the human body, are tremendously rare. even our most familiar solids are mostly space. if we could take apart such a solid, piece by piece, we would eventually reach the tiny molecules from which it is formed. molecules are the smallest particles into which any matter can be divided while still retaining its chemical properties. a molecule of water (h2o), for example, consists of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom bonded together. molecules, in turn, are built of atoms, which are the smallest particles of an element that can still be identified as that element. for example, an atom of gold is the smallest possible piece of gold. nearly 100 different kinds of atoms (elements) exist in nature. most of them are rare, and only a handful account for more than 99% of everything with which we come in contact. the most abundant elements in the cosmos today are listed in table 1.1; think of this table as the “greatest hits” of the universe when it comes to elements. note that the list includes the four elements most common in life on earth—hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen.