the length of time that photons require to reach the surface depends on how far a photon on average travels between collisions, and the travel time depends on what model of the complicated solar interior we accept. estimates are somewhat uncertain but indicate that the emission of energy from the surface of the sun can lag its production in the interior by 100,000 years to as much as 1,000,000 years. in addition to the positron, the fusion of two hydrogen atoms to form deuterium results in the emission of a neutrino. because neutrinos interact so little with ordinary matter, those produced by fusion reactions near the center of the sun travel directly to the sun’s surface and then out into space, in all directions. neutrinos move at nearly the speed of light, and they escape the sun about two seconds after they are created. figure 16.7 proton-proton chain, step 2. this is the second step of the proton-proton chain, the fusion reaction that converts hydrogen into helium in the sun. this step combines one hydrogen nucleus, which is a proton (shown in blue), with the deuterium nucleus from the previous step (shown as a red and blue particle).
the product of this is an isotope of helium with two protons (blue) and one neutron (red) and energy in the form of gamma-ray radiation. the second step in forming helium from hydrogen is to add another proton to the deuterium nucleus to create a helium nucleus that contains two protons and one neutron (figure 16.7). in the process, some mass is again lost and more gamma radiation is emitted. such a nucleus is helium because an element is defined by its number of protons; any nucleus with two protons is called helium. but this form of helium, which we call helium-3 (and write in shorthand as 3he) is not the isotope we see in the sun’s atmosphere or on earth. that helium has two neutrons and two protons and hence is called helium-4 (4he). to get to helium-4 in the sun, helium-3 must combine with another helium-3 in the third step of fusion (illustrated in figure 16.8). note that two energetic protons are left over from this step; each of them comes out of the reaction ready to collide with other protons and to start step 1 in the chain of reactions all over again.
figure 16.8 proton-proton chain, step 3. this is the third step in the fusion of hydrogen into helium in the sun. note that the two helium-3 nuclei from the second step (see figure 16.7) must combine before the third step becomes possible. the two protons that come out of this step have the energy to collide with other protons in the sun and start step one again. 552 16 • the sun: a nuclear powerhouse access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page570_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page570_img2.jpeg] visit the tokamak fusion reactor (https://openstax.org/l/30tokamakfusrea) at the general atomics lab in san diego, ca, for an 8-minute tour. the proton-proton chain the nuclear reactions in the sun that we have been discussing can be described succinctly through the following nuclear formulas: here, the superscripts indicate the total number of neutrons plus protons in the nucleus, e+ is the positron, v is the neutrino, and γ indicates that gamma rays are emitted.
note that the third step requires two helium-3 nuclei to start; the first two steps must happen twice before the third step can occur. although, as we discussed, the first step in this chain of reactions is very difficult and generally takes a long time, the other steps happen more quickly. after the deuterium nucleus is formed, it survives an average of only about 6 seconds before being converted into 3he. about a million years after that (on average), the 3he nucleus will combine with another to form 4he. we can compute the amount of energy these reactions generate by calculating the difference in the initial and final masses. the masses of hydrogen and helium atoms in the units normally used by scientists are 1.007825 u and 4.00268 u, respectively. (the unit of mass, u, is defined to be 1/12 the mass of an atom of carbon, or approximately the mass of a proton.) here, we include the mass of the entire atom, not just the nucleus, because electrons are involved as well. when hydrogen is converted into helium, two positrons are created (remember, the first step happens twice), and these are annihilated with two free electrons, adding to the energy produced.