as it travels around the earth we see sunlight on the side of the moon that is facing the sun, but usually the sunlit side is not facing the earth. as a result we see different amounts of the sunlit face. this is what produces the phases of the moon that we see. tidally locked over billions of years, the moon has been tugging on the earth with its gravity. on the earth, this causes tides in our oceans. on the moon, this has slowed the moon’s rotation. currently the moon is tidally locked to the earth. this means that its rotational period is equal to the time it takes to complete one orbit around the earth. as it moves around the earth, it rotates just enough to keep one side facing the earth all the time. this tugging on the moon is increasing its speed in its orbit. this has the effect that the moon is moving away from the earth at a rate of about 1.48 inches per year. just as the moon’s rotational period slowed down to tidally lock the moon to the earth, the same effect is happening to the earth’s rotational speed. it is slowing down. but we will likely never become tidally locked to the moon.
there are two reasons for this: 1. as the moon moves away from the earth, the effect decreases. 2. in about three billion years the oceans will boil away. when this happens the effect will further lessen since it is largely caused by the ocean tides on earth. cause of the phases phases are caused by the alignment of the sun, moon, and the earth. when the side that is facing the sun is lit, the side facing away from the sun is dark. as the moon orbits the earth, the lit side is sometimes the same side facing the earth. this is the full moon. about two weeks later, the dark side is facing the earth. this is the new moon. during the month we see less or the moon rotates in exactly the same time as it takes to revolve around the earth astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 39 figure 28: moon phases (the outer circle of moons shows the shape or the phase we see from earth) more of the moon’s lit side depending on where the moon is in its orbit around the earth. waxing – increasing in size. starting at new moon, the moon is waxing until it reaches the full moon.
this includes the phases of waxing crescent, first quarter, and waxing gibbous. waning – decreasing in size. starting at the full moon, the moon is waning until it reaches the new moon. this includes the phases of waning crescent, third quarter, and waning gibbous. from our perspective on earth, the quarter moons are half illuminated. the term quarter relates to the monthly lunar cycle. if you consider the cycle from new moon until the next new moon, the quarter moons are a quarter of the complete cycle. the full moon is really the second quarter moon, but we call it the full moon. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page39_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 40 component 11 – eclipses eclipses an eclipse is when one object moves in front of another object and blocks the light from the sun. the earth is involved with two categories of eclipses: lunar eclipses and solar eclipses. earth’s shadow. the earth’s shadow has two parts: the umbra and the penumbra (see figure 29). if an object is inside the umbra, the earth is blocking all sunlight from reaching the object.
if an object is in the penumbra then the earth is partially covering up the sun and some of the sun’s light is still reaching the object. lunar eclipses. lunar eclipses are caused when the moon moves into the shadow of the earth (see figure 29). sunlight is blocked from reaching the moon by the earth. the moon is full. there are three types of lunar eclipses: total eclipse, partial eclipse, and penumbral eclipse. a total lunar eclipse (position 2 in figure 29 and left side of figure 30) is when the moon moves completely inside the umbral shadow of the earth, so the entire moon does not receive any light from the sun. a partial lunar eclipse (position 1 in figure 29 and center of figure 30) is when the moon is only partially in the umbral shadow of the earth. part of the moon receives no sunlight, but the rest of the moon is only partially blocked by the earth and some sunlight reaches that part of the moon.