when that continuous spectrum is viewed through a thinner cloud of gas, an absorption line spectrum can be seen superimposed on the continuous spectrum. if we look only at a cloud of excited gas atoms (with no continuous source seen behind it), we see that the excited atoms give off an emission line spectrum. 5.5 • formation of spectral lines 167 [image: astronomy_openstax_page185_img1.jpeg] figure 5.21 three kinds of spectra. when we see a lightbulb or other source of continuous radiation, all the colors are present. when the continuous spectrum is seen through a thinner gas cloud, the cloud’s atoms produce absorption lines in the continuous spectrum. when the excited cloud is seen without the continuous source behind it, its atoms produce emission lines. we can learn which types of atoms are in the gas cloud from the pattern of absorption or emission lines. atoms in a hot gas are moving at high speeds and continually colliding with one another and with any loose electrons. they can be excited (electrons moving to a higher level) and de-excited (electrons moving to a lower level) by these collisions as well as by absorbing and emitting light. the speed of atoms in a gas depends on the temperature.
when the temperature is higher, so are the speed and energy of the collisions. the hotter the gas, therefore, the more likely that electrons will occupy the outermost orbits, which correspond to the highest energy levels. this means that the level where electrons start their upward jumps in a gas can serve as an indicator of how hot that gas is. in this way, the absorption lines in a spectrum give astronomers information about the temperature of the regions where the lines originate. use this simulation (https://openstax.org/l/30hatom) to play with a hydrogen atom and see what happens when electrons move to higher levels and then give off photons as they go to a lower level. ionization we have described how certain discrete amounts of energy can be absorbed by an atom, raising it to an excited state and moving one of its electrons farther from its nucleus. if enough energy is absorbed, the electron can be completely removed from the atom—this is called ionization. the atom is then said to be ionized. the minimum amount of energy required to remove one electron from an atom in its ground state is called its ionization energy.
still-greater amounts of energy must be absorbed by the now-ionized atom (called an ion) to remove an additional electron deeper in the structure of the atom. successively greater energies are needed to remove the third, fourth, fifth—and so on—electrons from the atom. if enough energy is available, an atom can become completely ionized, losing all of its electrons. a hydrogen atom, having only one electron to lose, can be ionized only once; a helium atom can be ionized twice; and an oxygen atom up to eight times. when we examine regions of the cosmos where there is a great deal of energetic radiation, such as the neighborhoods where hot young stars have recently formed, we see a lot of ionization going on. link to learning 168 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page186_img1.jpeg] an atom that has become positively ionized has lost a negative charge—the missing electron—and thus is left with a net positive charge. it therefore exerts a strong attraction on any free electron. eventually, one or more electrons will be captured and the atom will become neutral (or ionized to one less degree) again.
during the electron-capture process, the atom emits one or more photons. which photons are emitted depends on whether the electron is captured at once to the lowest energy level of the atom or stops at one or more intermediate levels on its way to the lowest available level. just as the excitation of an atom can result from a collision with another atom, ion, or electron (collisions with electrons are usually most important), so can ionization. the rate at which such collisional ionizations occur depends on the speeds of the atoms and hence on the temperature of the gas—the hotter the gas, the more of its atoms will be ionized. the rate at which ions and electrons recombine also depends on their relative speeds—that is, on the temperature. in addition, it depends on the density of the gas: the higher the density, the greater the chance for recapture, because the different kinds of particles are crowded more closely together. from a knowledge of the temperature and density of a gas, it is possible to calculate the fraction of atoms that have been ionized once, twice, and so on.