chiron orbits the sun every 50 years, with its closest approach being inside the orbit of saturn and its farthest approach out to the orbit of uranus. describe the traits of the centaur objects chronicle the discovery and describe the composition of the oort cloud describe trans-neptunian and kuiper-belt objects explain the proposed fate of comets that enter the inner solar system 13.4 • the origin and fate of comets and related objects 459 [image: astronomy_openstax_page477_img1.jpeg] in 1992, a still-more-distant object named pholus was discovered with an orbit that takes it 33 au from the sun, beyond the orbit of neptune. pholus has the reddest surface of any object in the solar system, indicating a strange (and still unknown) surface composition. as more objects are discovered in these distant reaches, astronomers decided that they will be given the names of centaurs from classical mythology; this is because the centaurs were half human, half horse, and these new objects display some of the properties of both asteroids and comets. beyond the orbit of neptune lies a cold, dark realm populated by objects called simply trans-neptunian objects (tnos).
the first discovered, and best known, of these tnos is the dwarf planet pluto. we discussed pluto and the new horizons spacecraft encounter with it in rings, moons, and pluto. the second tno was discovered in 1992, and now more than a thousand are known, most of them smaller than pluto. in late 2018, a team of astronomers announced the discovery of the most distant tno found so far, orbiting at 120 astronomical units, or 3 ½ times the distance of pluto; they nicknamed it “farout.” the largest ones after pluto—named eris, makemake, and haumea—are also classed as dwarf planets. except for their small size, dwarf planets have many properties in common with the larger planets. pluto has five moons, and two moons have been discovered orbiting haumea and one each circling eris and makemake. the kuiper belt and the oort cloud tnos are a part of what is called the kuiper belt, a large area of space beyond neptune that is also the source of many comets. astronomers study the kuiper belt in two ways.
new, more powerful telescopes allow us to discover many of the larger members of the kuiper belt directly. we can also measure the composition of short-period comets that are thought to originate in the kuiper belt, where small gravitational perturbations from neptune can gradually shift their orbits until they can penetrate the inner solar system. more than a thousand kuiper belt objects have been discovered, and astronomers estimate that there are more than 100,000 with diameters larger than 100 kilometers, in a disk extending out to about 50 au from the sun. following its successful flyby of pluto, the new horizons spacecraft explored the kuiper belt. the team eventually identified a member of the belt, 2014 mu16 (subsequently named arrokoth), that could be reached by a slight change in the spacecraft trajectory. new horizons flew past arrokoth on january 1, 2019, at a distance of only 3,500 km, obtaining images and other data. the target turned out to be a contact binary, something new and unexpected (see photo).
by following their orbits backward, we can calculate that the aphelia (points farthest from the sun) of newly discovered comets typically have values near 50,000 au (more than a thousand times farther than pluto). this clustering of aphelion distances was first noted by dutch astronomer jan oort, who, in 1950, proposed an idea for the origin of those comets that is still accepted today (figure 13.27). 460 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org figure 13.27 jan oort (1900–1992). (a) jan oort first suggested that there might be a reservoir of frozen chunks, potential comet nuclei, at the edge of the region of the sun’s gravitational influence. (b) the first color image of the kuiper belt object named arrokoth, taken at a distance of 137,000 kilometers from the new horizons spacecraft on january 1, 2019.