figure 13.8 looking down on the north pole of eros. this view was constructed from six images of the asteroid taken from an altitude of 200 kilometers. the large crater at the top has been named psyche (after the maiden who was eros’ lover in classical mythology) and is about 5.3 kilometers wide. a saddle-shaped region can be seen directly below it. craters of many different sizes are visible. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jhupl) eros has a good deal of loose surface material that appears to have slid down toward lower elevations. in some places, the surface rubble layer is 100 meters deep. the top of loose soil is dotted with scattered, half- buried boulders. there are so many of these boulders that they are more numerous than the craters. of course, with the gravity so low on this small world, a visiting astronaut would find loose boulders rolling toward her pretty slowly and could easily leap high enough to avoid being hit by one.
although the near- shoemaker spacecraft was not constructed as a lander, at the end of its orbital mission in 2000, it was allowed to fall gently to the surface, where it continued its chemical analysis for another week. 442 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page460_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page460_img2.jpeg] in 2003, japan’s hayabusa 1 mission not only visited a small asteroid but also brought back samples to study in laboratories on earth. the target s-type asteroid, itokawa (shown in figure 13.9), is much smaller than eros, only about 500 meters long. this asteroid is elongated and appears to be the result of the collision of two separate asteroids long ago. there are almost no impact craters, but an abundance of boulders (like a pile of rubble) on the surface. figure 13.9 asteroid itokawa. the surface of asteroid itokawa appears to have no craters.
astronomers have hypothesized that its surface consists of rocks and ice chunks held together by a small amount of gravity, and its interior is probably also a similar rubble pile. (credit: jaxa) the hayabusa spacecraft was designed not to land, but to touch the surface just long enough to collect a small sample. this tricky maneuver failed on its first try, with the spacecraft briefly toppling over on its side. eventually, the controllers were successful in picking up a few grains of surface material and transferring them into the return capsule. we estimate that the dust grains hayabusa picked up had been exposed on the surface of the asteroid for about 8 million years. following on the success of hayabusa, both nasa and the japanese space agency, jaxa, sent more advanced asteroid sample-return missions. both targeted small earth-approaching asteroids, only about 1 km in diameter. each target is a dark object, apparently a rubble pile formed relatively recently after being broken apart in a collision. hayabusa-2 visited the asteroid ryugu, collected a small sample, and successfully returned it to earth in december 2020. the u.s.
mission called osiris-rex visited bennu, an asteroid that actually has a small chance of colliding with earth in the next century (figure 13.10). its sample was successfully returned to earth on september 24, 2023 and is now being analyzed in several laboratories. 13.1 • asteroids 443 [image: astronomy_openstax_page461_img1.jpeg] figure 13.10 examining an asteroid up close. (a) near-earth asteroid bennu, imaged by the osiris-rex spacecraft in 2020. bennu is a small (half-km diameter), rapidly spinning dark asteroid. its low density suggests it is a loosely-bound rubble pile. the surface is very rough, with protruding rocks and boulders. (b) preparing to collect a sample, the collection arm is shown just before touch- down on bennu. for scale, the diameter of the sampling device is 30 cm. the sample of about 100 grams of surface rocks and dust will be returned to earth in 2023.