(credit: the lick observatory) 680 20 • between the stars: gas and dust in space access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page698_img1.jpeg] detecting dust the dark cloud seen in figure 20.9 blocks the light of the many stars that lie behind it; note how the regions in other parts of the photograph are crowded with stars. barnard 68 is an example of a relatively dense cloud or dark nebula containing tiny, solid dust grains. such opaque clouds are conspicuous on any photograph of the milky way, the galaxy in which the sun is located (see the figures in the milky way galaxy). the “dark rift,” which runs lengthwise down a long part of the milky way in our sky and appears to split it in two, is produced by a collection of such obscuring clouds. while dust clouds are too cold to radiate a measurable amount of energy in the visible part of the spectrum, they glow brightly in the infrared (figure 20.11). the reason is that small dust grains absorb visible light and ultraviolet radiation very efficiently.
the grains are heated by the absorbed radiation, typically to temperatures from 10 to about 500 k, and re-radiate this heat at infrared wavelengths. figure 20.11 visible and infrared images of the horsehead nebula in orion. this dark cloud is one of the best-known images in astronomy, probably because it really does resemble a horse’s head. the horse-head shape is an extension of a large cloud of dust that fills the lower part of the picture. (a) seen in visible light, the dust clouds are especially easy to see against the bright background. (b) this infrared radiation image from the region of the horse head was recorded by nasa’s wide-field infrared survey explorer. note how the regions that appear dark in visible light appear bright in the infrared. the dust is heated by nearby stars and re-radiates this heat in the infrared. only the top of the horse’s head is visible in the infrared image. bright dots seen in the nebula below and to the left and at the top of the horse head are young, newly formed stars. the insets show the horse head and the bright nebula in more detail.
(credit a: modification of work by eso and digitized sky survey; credit b: modification of work by nasa/jpl- caltech) thanks to their small sizes and low temperatures, interstellar grains radiate most of their energy at infrared to microwave frequencies, with wavelengths of tens to hundreds of microns. earth’s atmosphere is opaque to radiation at these wavelengths, so emission by interstellar dust is best measured from space. observations from above earth’s atmosphere show that dust clouds are present throughout the plane of the milky way (figure 20.12). 20.3 • cosmic dust 681 [image: astronomy_openstax_page699_img1.jpeg] figure 20.12 infrared emission from the plane of the milky way. this infrared image taken by the spitzer space telescope shows a field in the plane of the milky way galaxy. (our galaxy is in the shape of a frisbee; the plane of the milky way is the flat disk of that frisbee.
since the sun, earth, and solar system are located in the plane of the milky way and at a large distance from its center, we view the galaxy edge on, much as we might look at a glass plate from its edge.) this emission is produced by tiny dust grains, which emit at 3.6 microns (blue in this image), 8.0 microns (green), and 24 microns (red). the densest regions of dust are so cold and opaque that they appear as dark clouds even at these infrared wavelengths. the red bubbles visible throughout indicate regions where the dust has been warmed up by young stars. this heating increases the emission at 24 microns, leading to the redder color in this image. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/university of wisconsin) some dense clouds of dust are close to luminous stars and scatter enough starlight to become visible. such a cloud of dust, illuminated by starlight, is called a reflection nebula, since the light we see is starlight reflected off the grains of dust. one of the best-known examples is the nebulosity around each of the brightest stars in the pleiades cluster (see figure 20.13).