astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 80 figure 94: active optics actuators, the microlensing observations in the astrophysics (moa) telescope photo by evil monkey to eliminate problems from the atmosphere and light pollution, we place telescopes: • at high altitudes to get above the atmosphere • in the deserts to have low humidity • remote from civilization component 22 – seeing more detail if you are observing with a telescope sitting on the ground on earth, there is only so much you can do with the telescope itself to improve the images it records. you can provide better optics, larger apertures, and higher resolution ccd chips, but that is the extent of that which you control. you still have the atmosphere between your telescope and the objects. we will explore techniques that have been pursued to overcome challenges caused by the atmosphere. location, location, location for a long time astronomers have built their telescopes in locations where the atmosphere produces less of a challenge. criteria for placement include: • high: high altitudes – to get above much of the atmosphere. • dry: desert climates – to reduce the impact of humidity. • remote: to reduce the impact of light pollution from civilization.
this is why many of the world’s largest and most productive observatories are located on mountain tops. examples would include the mountains of chile, the mountains of hawaii, and even the mountains of west texas. active optics but location is not all you can do. you can build the mirrors of your telescope so that they can be adjusted while in use to compensate for changes in the atmosphere. this is done by employing computers to analyze the images and make quick corrections for disturbances. this can compensate for changes in the mirror due to temperature and barometric pressure changes, changes in the air [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page80_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 81 temperature inside the dome, and even turbulence in the atmosphere. changes in dome designs, mirror temperature control, and mirror shape control all contribute to better imaging from the telescope. resolution can be improved to tenths of an arc-second, far better than can be obtained without active optics. adaptive optics in an effort to further improve the capabilities of a telescope, and to compensate for additional disturbances in the atmosphere, astronomers employ adaptive optics. adaptive optics provides a means to adjust the parts of the mirror in real-time.
using a laser, an artificial star is created high in the atmosphere. this artificial star is above most of the atmosphere and when changes are noted in the appearance of this star, the mirrors can be adjusted to compensate. these changes can be done thousands of times per second. this provides sharper images of real stars and other celestial objects. the lower the frequency of the light being observed, the easier it is to apply adaptive optics. this is due to smaller affects on infrared light in the atmosphere than visible light. also, the lower the frequency, the greater the tolerances for making adjustments. figure 95: the keck ii telescope on mauna kea, hawaii with adaptive optics laser photo by paul hirst [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page81_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 82 figure 96: hubble telescope component 23 – space from space the earth’s atmosphere, although very valuable to life on earth, is a hindrance to most astronomy. some frequencies are able to penetrate the atmosphere to telescopes on the ground, but some cannot.
visible light and radio waves are not hindered by the atmosphere itself, but there are air currents in the atmosphere, light pollution, dust, clouds, birds, and humidity that reduce the quality of images taken in the visible part of the spectrum. fortunately, radio waves are not impacted. to eliminate these problems, all you need to do is eliminate the atmosphere. the solution is to place telescopes in space. initially, small telescopes and observatories at many different frequencies were placed on satellites. these were followed by larger and higher resolution observatories. these large observatories are often referred to as the great space observatories: • spitzer telescope (infrared light) • hubble telescope (visible light) • chandra x-ray telescope • compton gamma ray observatory • james webb telescope (infrared light) in 1946 lyman spitzer proposed placing telescopes in space. the result of his lobbying was the launch of the hubble space telescope in 1990. but there were many observatories before, and since, hubble. visible light observatories in 1989, the european space agency launched the hipparcos observatory. the purpose of this observatory was to accurately measure the locations of stars.