suppose you want to determine whether a star is a giant. a giant star has a large, extended photosphere. because it is so large, a giant star’s atoms are spread over a great volume, which means that the density of particles in the star’s photosphere is low. as a result, the pressure in a giant star’s photosphere is also low. this low pressure affects the spectrum in two ways. first, a star with a lower-pressure photosphere shows narrower spectral lines than a star of the same temperature with a higher-pressure photosphere (figure 17.9). the difference is large enough that careful study of spectra can tell which of two stars at the same temperature has a higher pressure (and is thus more compressed) and which has a lower pressure (and thus must be extended). this effect is due to collisions between particles in the star’s photosphere—more collisions lead to broader spectral lines. collisions will, of course, be more frequent in a higher-density environment. think about it like traffic—collisions are much more likely during rush hour, when the density of cars is high. second, more atoms are ionized in a giant star than in a star like the sun with the same temperature.
the ionization of atoms in a star’s outer layers is caused mainly by photons, and the amount of energy carried by photons is determined by temperature. but how long atoms stay ionized depends in part on pressure. compared with what happens in the sun (with its relatively dense photosphere), ionized atoms in a giant star’s photosphere are less likely to pass close enough to electrons to interact and combine with one or more of them, thereby becoming neutral again. ionized atoms, as we discussed earlier, have different spectra from atoms that are neutral. understand how astronomers can learn about a star’s radius and composition by studying its spectrum explain how astronomers can measure the motion and rotation of a star using the doppler effect describe the proper motion of a star and how it relates to a star’s space velocity 586 17 • analyzing starlight access for free at openstax.org figure 17.9 spectral lines. this figure illustrates one difference in the spectral lines from stars of the same temperature but different pressures. a giant star with a very-low-pressure photosphere shows very narrow spectral lines (bottom), whereas a smaller star with a higher-pressure photosphere shows much broader spectral lines (top). (credit: modification of work by nasa, esa, a.
field, and j. kalirai (stsci)) abundances of the elements absorption lines of a majority of the known chemical elements have now been identified in the spectra of the sun and stars. if we see lines of iron in a star’s spectrum, for example, then we know immediately that the star must contain iron. note that the absence of an element’s spectral lines does not necessarily mean that the element itself is absent. as we saw, the temperature and pressure in a star’s atmosphere will determine what types of atoms are able to produce absorption lines. only if the physical conditions in a star’s photosphere are such that lines of an element should (according to calculations) be there can we conclude that the absence of observable spectral lines implies low abundance of the element. suppose two stars have identical temperatures and pressures, but the lines of, say, sodium are stronger in one than in the other. stronger lines mean that there are more atoms in the stellar photosphere absorbing light. therefore, we know immediately that the star with stronger sodium lines contains more sodium. complex calculations are required to determine exactly how much more, but those calculations can be done for any element observed in any star with any temperature and pressure.
of course, astronomy textbooks such as ours always make these things sound a bit easier than they really are. if you look at the stellar spectra such as those in figure 17.6, you may get some feeling for how hard it is to decode all of the information contained in the thousands of absorption lines. first of all, it has taken many years of careful laboratory work on earth to determine the precise wavelengths at which hot gases of each element have their spectral lines. long books and computer databases have been compiled to show the lines of each element that can be seen at each temperature. second, stellar spectra usually have many lines from a number of elements, and we must be careful to sort them out correctly. sometimes nature is unhelpful, and lines of different elements have identical wavelengths, thereby adding to the confusion. and third, as we saw in the chapter on radiation and spectra, the motion of the star can change the observed wavelength of each of the lines. so, the observed wavelengths may not match laboratory measurements exactly. in practice, analyzing stellar spectra is a demanding, sometimes frustrating task that requires both training and skill. studies of stellar spectra have shown that hydrogen makes up about three-quarters of the mass of most stars.