however, we know from geologic evidence that water was present on earth’s surface nearly 4 billion years ago, so the sun must have been shining brightly (and making earth warm) at least as long as that. today, we also know that at the temperatures found in the sun, nothing like solid wood or coal could survive. what’s watt? just a word about the units we are using. a watt (w) is a unit of power, which is energy used or given off per unit time. it is measured in joules per second (j/s). you know from your everyday experience that it is not just how much energy you expend, but how long you take to do it. (burning 10 calories in 10 minutes requires a very different kind of exercise than burning those 10 calories in an hour.) watts tell you the rate at which energy is being used; for example, a 100-watt bulb uses 100 joules (j) of energy every second. and how big is a joule? a 73-kilogram (160-pound) astronomy instructor running at about 4.4 meters per second (10 miles per hour) because he is late for class has a motion energy of about 700 joules.
conservation of energy other nineteenth-century attempts to determine what makes the sun shine used the law of conservation of energy. simply stated, this law says that energy cannot be created or destroyed, but can be transformed from one type to another, such as from heat to mechanical energy. the steam engine, which was key to the industrial revolution, provides a good example. in this type of engine, the hot steam from a boiler drives the movement of a piston, converting heat energy into motion energy. conversely, motion can be transformed into heat. if you clap your hands vigorously at the end of an especially good astronomy lecture, your palms become hotter. if you rub ice on the surface of a table, the heat produced by friction melts the ice. the brakes on cars use friction to reduce speed, and in the process, transform motion energy into heat energy. that is why after bringing a car to a stop, the brakes can be very hot; this also explains why brakes can overheat when used carelessly while descending long mountain roads. in the nineteenth century, scientists thought that the source of the sun’s heat might be the mechanical motion of meteorites falling into it.
their calculations showed, however, that in order to produce the total amount of energy emitted by the sun, the mass in meteorites that would have to fall into the sun every 100 years would equal the mass of earth. the resulting increase in the sun’s mass would, according to kepler’s third law, change the period of earth’s orbit by 2 seconds per year. such a change would be easily measurable and was not, in fact, occurring. scientists could then disprove this as the source of the sun’s energy. gravitational contraction as a source of energy proposing an alternative explanation, british physicist lord kelvin and german scientist hermann von astronomy basics 544 16 • the sun: a nuclear powerhouse access for free at openstax.org helmholtz (figure 16.2), in about the middle of the nineteenth century, proposed that the sun might produce energy by the conversion of gravitational energy into heat. they suggested that the outer layers of the sun might be “falling” inward because of the force of gravity. in other words, they proposed that the sun could be shrinking in size, staying hot and bright as a result.
figure 16.2 kelvin (1824–1907) and helmholtz (1821–1894). (a) british physicist william thomson (lord kelvin) and (b) german scientist hermann von helmholtz proposed that the contraction of the sun under its own gravity might account for its energy. (credit a: modification of work by wellcome library, london; credit b: modification of work by wellcome library, london) to imagine what would happen if this hypothesis were true, picture the outer layer of the sun starting to fall inward. this outer layer is a gas made up of individual atoms, all moving about in random directions. if a layer falls inward, the atoms acquire an additional speed because of falling motion. as the outer layer falls inward, it also contracts, moving the atoms closer together. collisions become more likely, and some of them transfer the extra speed associated with the falling motion to other atoms. this, in turn, increases the speeds of those atoms. the temperature of a gas is a measure of the kinetic energy (motion) of the atoms within it; hence, the temperature of this layer of the sun increases. collisions also excite electrons within the atoms to higher- energy orbits.