astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 426 figure 465: apollonius' equant model b a c e d q p f figure 466: epicycle-on-deferent model the second was the epicycle-on- deferent model. here you can see that the earth is located at the center of the large circle, the deferent. on that circle is a smaller circle, called the epicycle. the planet p sits on the epicycle and goes around it using uniform circular motion. but the center of the epicycle moves along the deferent at the same time, also using uniform circular motion. the resulting motion for the planet is a combination of both motions. notice that in the first diagram the planet is moving in the same direction as the epicycle is moving on the deferent. the second diagram shows what happens at a later time when the planet is moving opposite the motion of the epicycle on the deferent. if you choose appropriate values for speeds of these two motions, it is possible to show how this model can solve another component of the problem of the planets, changes in direction, especially retrograde motion.
in this diagram, you can see how the epicycle-on-deferent model introduces a looping motion, where sometimes the planet moves normally, and sometimes moves backward. the numbers show the sequence of these motions. each of the planets (other than the sun and moon) occasionally appears to move backward, so this model was introduced to solve the problem presented by each planet’s unique retrograde motion. the third model introduced by apollonius was the equant model. this model did not follow plato’s dictum for uniform circular motion, because the equant employs equal angles in equal times. in this diagram, all three models are shown: the earth is eccentric to the center, c, of the deferent; the planet p is on an epicycle; and the equant point, q, is the center from which angles are measured for the planet’s motion. since the equant point is also eccentric, and exactly opposite the earth, the planet moves more slowly when it is close to q and far away from the earth (you can trace this out for yourself). and it will move faster when it is far away from q and nearest to the earth. the equant model thus solves the third component of the problem of the planets, variations in speed.
but mathematical modelling was not the only kind of astronomy performed in alexandria. the greatest observational astronomer in the ancient world was hipparchus of nicaea, in the 2nd [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page426_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 427 figure 467: ptolemy’s model century bce. by his day, the great library had accumulated works from the known world, and in its collections were some of the records of the chaldeans that had passed down to the assyrians and the persians. hipparchus noticed that a few positions for the so-called “fixed” stars had actually moved somewhat over the centuries. taking his own measurements for the star spica, and comparing them with older records, he calculated that its position moved about 1° per century. hipparchus had not only discovered precession of the equinoxes, he had also measured it with naked eye observations (the actual rate is closer to 1° every 71.6 years, or 50.3 arc-second per year).
he also produced the first reasonably accurate map for stars visible from alexandria, which included about 850 of the brightest stars (obviously he wasn’t hampered by light pollution). finally we come to claudius ptolemy, who, at alexandria around 150 ce, composed his system, the syntaxis. ptolemy was not so much an innovator as he was a compiler of everything known in his day. he used all three models developed by apollonius; he used the observations of hipparchus; and he followed plato’s injunction that only uniform circular motion may be employed to solve the problem of the planets. using the best observations available to him, he produced mathematical models for each planet, and then calculated tables from those models for their future positions. the figure here is ptolemy’s actual model for the planet mercury. the syntaxis also included aristotle’s mechanical models, and he included what was known about babylonian and egyptian astrology. because he was able to solve the problem of the planets and “save the phenomena,” ptolemy’s system became authoritative, and the high-water mark of ancient astronomy. it would remain unchanged for centuries.