if you are interested in it, see some of the suggested resources at the end of this chapter.) in any case, you should now be prepared when scientists (or the authors of this book) sometimes discuss electromagnetic radiation as if it consisted of waves and at other times refer to it as a stream of photons. a photon (being a packet of energy) carries a specific amount of energy. we can use the idea of energy to connect the photon and wave models. how much energy a photon has depends on its frequency when you think about it as a wave. a low-energy radio wave has a low frequency as a wave, while a high-energy x-ray at your dentist’s office is a high-frequency wave. among the colors of visible light, violet-light photons have the highest energy and red-light photons have the lowest. test whether the connection between photons and waves is clear to you. in the above example, which photon would have the longer wavelength as a wave: the radio wave or the x-ray? if you answered the radio wave, you are correct. radio waves have a lower frequency, so the wave cycles are longer (they are elephants, not miniature ponies).
propagation of light let’s think for a moment about how light from a lightbulb moves through space. as waves expand, they travel away from the bulb, not just toward your eyes but in all directions. they must therefore cover an ever- widening space. yet the total amount of light available can’t change once the light has left the bulb. this means that, as the same expanding shell of light covers a larger and larger area, there must be less and less of it in any given place. light (and all other electromagnetic radiation) gets weaker and weaker as it gets farther from its source. the increase in the area that the light must cover is proportional to the square of the distance that the light has traveled (figure 5.5). if we stand twice as far from the source, our eyes will intercept two-squared (2 × 2), or four times less light. if we stand 10 times farther from the source, we get 10-squared, or 100 times less light. you can see how this weakening means trouble for sources of light at astronomical distances. one of the nearest stars, alpha centauri a, emits about the same total energy as the sun.
but it is about 270,000 times farther away, and so it appears about 73 billion times fainter. no wonder the stars, which close-up would look more or less like the sun, look like faint pinpoints of light from far away. 5.1 • the behavior of light 147 figure 5.5 inverse square law for light. as light radiates away from its source, it spreads out in such a way that the energy per unit area (the amount of energy passing through one of the small squares) decreases as the square of the distance from its source. this idea—that the apparent brightness of a source (how bright it looks to us) gets weaker with distance in the way we have described—is known as the inverse square law for light propagation. in this respect, the propagation of light is similar to the effects of gravity. remember that the force of gravity between two attracting masses is also inversely proportional to the square of their separation. e x a m p l e 5 . 2 the inverse square law for light the intensity of a 120-w lightbulb observed from a distance 2 m away is 2.4 w/m2. what would be the intensity if this distance was doubled?
solution if we move twice as far away, then the answer will change according to the inverse square of the distance, so the new intensity will be of the original intensity, or 0.6 w/m2. check your learning how many times brighter or fainter would a star appear if it were moved to: a. twice its present distance? b. ten times its present distance? c. half its present distance? answer: a. ; b. ; c. 148 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page166_img1.jpeg] 5.2 the electromagnetic spectrum learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: objects in the universe send out an enormous range of electromagnetic radiation. scientists call this range the electromagnetic spectrum, which they have divided into a number of categories. the spectrum is shown in figure 5.6, with some information about the waves in each part or band. figure 5.6 radiation and earth’s atmosphere. this figure shows the bands of the electromagnetic spectrum and how well earth’s atmosphere transmits them. note that high-frequency waves from space do not make it to the surface and must therefore be observed from space.