it turns out, however, that the few objects seen at large distances from the luminous boundary of the milky way galaxy are not moving more slowly than the sun. there are some globular clusters and rr lyrae stars between 30,000 and 150,000 light-years from the center of the galaxy, and their orbital velocities are even greater than the sun’s (figure 25.13). figure 25.13 rotation curve of the galaxy. the orbital speed of carbon monoxide (co) and hydrogen (h) gas at different distances from the center of the milky way galaxy is shown in red. the blue curve shows what the rotation curve would look like if all the matter in the galaxy were located inside a radius of 50,000 light-years. instead of going down, the speed of gas clouds farther out remains high, indicating a great deal of mass beyond the sun’s orbit. the horizontal axis shows the distance from the galactic center in kiloparsecs (where a kiloparsec equals 3,260 light-years). what do these higher speeds mean?
kepler’s third law tells us how fast objects must orbit a source of gravity if they are neither to fall in (because they move too slowly) nor to escape (because they move too fast). if the galaxy had only the mass calculated by kepler, then the high-speed outer objects should long ago have escaped the grip of the milky way. the fact that they have not done so means that our galaxy must have more gravity than can be supplied by the luminous matter—in fact, a lot more gravity. the high speed of these outer objects tells us that the source of this extra gravity must extend outward from the center far beyond the sun’s orbit. if the gravity were supplied by stars or by something else that gives off radiation, we should have spotted this additional outer material long ago. we are therefore forced to the reluctant conclusion that this matter is invisible and has, except for its gravitational pull, gone entirely undetected. studies of the motions of the most remote globular clusters and the small galaxies that orbit our own show that the total mass of the galaxy is at least msun, which is about twenty times greater than the amount of luminous matter.
moreover, the dark matter (as astronomers have come to call the invisible material) extends to a distance of at least 200,000 light-years from the center of the galaxy. observations indicate that this dark matter halo is almost but not quite spherical. the obvious question is: what is the dark matter made of? let’s look at a list of “suspects” taken from our study of astronomy so far. since this matter is invisible, it clearly cannot be in the form of ordinary stars. and it cannot be gas in any form (remember that there has to be a lot of it). if it were neutral hydrogen gas, its 21-cm wavelength spectral-line emission would have been detected as radio waves. if it were ionized hydrogen, it should be hot enough to emit visible radiation. if a lot of hydrogen atoms out there had combined into hydrogen molecules, these should produce dark features in the ultraviolet spectra of objects lying beyond the galaxy, but such features have not been seen. nor can the dark matter consist of interstellar dust, since in the 25.3 • the mass of the galaxy 875 [image: astronomy_openstax_page893_img1.jpeg] required quantities, the dust would significantly obscure the light from distant galaxies.
what are our other possibilities? the dark matter cannot be a huge number of black holes (of stellar mass) or old neutron stars, since interstellar matter falling onto such objects would produce more x-rays than are observed. also, recall that the formation of black holes and neutron stars is preceded by a substantial amount of mass loss, which scatters heavy elements into space to be incorporated into subsequent generations of stars. if the dark matter consisted of an enormous number of any of those objects, they would have blown off and recycled a lot of heavier elements over the history of the galaxy. in that case, the young stars we observe in our galaxy today would contain much greater abundances of heavy elements than they actually do. brown dwarfs and lone jupiter-like planets have also been ruled out. first of all, there would have to be an awful lot of them to make up so much dark matter. but we have a more direct test of whether so many low- mass objects could actually be lurking out there. as we learned in black holes and curved spacetime, the general theory of relativity predicts that the path traveled by light is changed when it passes near a concentration of mass.