it turns out that these heavier elements are formed later in the lives more massive stars, as well as during explosions that can mark the end of the lives of some stars. making new elements in massive stars massive stars evolve in much the same way that the sun does (but always more quickly)—up to the formation of a carbon-oxygen core. one difference is that for stars with more than about twice the mass of the sun, helium begins fusion more gradually, rather than with a sudden flash. also, when more massive stars become red giants, they become so bright and large that we call them supergiants. such stars can expand until their outer regions become as large as the orbit of jupiter, which is precisely what the hubble space telescope has shown for the star betelgeuse (see figure 22.4). they also lose mass very effectively, producing dramatic winds and outbursts as they age. figure 22.20 shows a wonderful image of the very massive star eta carinae, with a great deal of ejected material clearly visible. figure 22.20 eta carinae. with a mass at least 100 times that of the sun, the hot supergiant eta carinae is one of the most massive stars known.
this hubble space telescope image records the two giant lobes and equatorial disk of material it has ejected in the course of its evolution. the pink outer region is material ejected in an outburst seen in 1843, the largest of such mass loss event that any star is known to have survived. moving away from the star at a speed of about 1000 km/s, the material is rich in nitrogen and other elements formed in the interior of the star. the inner blue-white region is the material ejected at lower speeds and is thus still closer to the star. it appears blue-white because it contains dust and reflects the light of eta carinae, whose luminosity is 4 million times that of our sun. (credit: modification of work by jon morse (university of colorado) & nasa) but the crucial way that massive stars diverge from the story we have outlined is that they can start additional kinds of fusion in their centers and in the shells surrounding their central regions. the outer layers of a star with a mass greater than about 8 solar masses have a weight that is enough to compress the carbon-oxygen core until it becomes hot enough to ignite fusion of carbon nuclei.
carbon can fuse into still more oxygen, and at still higher temperatures, oxygen and then neon, magnesium, and finally silicon can build even heavier elements. iron is, however, the endpoint of this process. the fusion of iron atoms produces products that are 766 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page784_img1.jpeg] more massive than the nuclei that are being fused and therefore the process requires energy, as opposed to releasing energy, which all fusion reactions up to this point have done. this required energy comes at the expense of the star itself, which is now on the brink of death (figure 22.21). what happens next will be described in the chapter on the death of stars. figure 22.21 interior structure of a massive star just before it exhausts its nuclear fuel. high-mass stars can fuse elements heavier than carbon. as a massive star nears the end of its evolution, its interior resembles an onion. hydrogen fusion is taking place in an outer shell, and progressively heavier elements are undergoing fusion in the higher-temperature layers closer to the center. all of these fusion reactions generate energy and enable the star to continue shining. iron is different.
the fusion of iron requires energy, and when iron is finally created in the core, the star has only minutes to live. physicists have now found nuclear pathways whereby virtually all chemical elements of atomic weights up to that of iron can be built up by this nucleosynthesis (the making of new atomic nuclei) in the centers of the more massive red giant stars. this still leaves the question of where elements heavier than iron come from. we will see in the next chapter that when massive stars finally exhaust their nuclear fuel, they most often die in a spectacular explosion—a supernova. heavier elements can be synthesized in the stunning violence of such explosions. not only can we explain in this way where the elements that make up our world and others come from, but our theories of nucleosynthesis inside stars are even able to predict the relative abundances with which the elements occur in nature. the way stars build up elements during various nuclear reactions really can explain why some elements (oxygen, carbon, and iron) are common and others are quite rare (gold, silver, and uranium). elements in globular clusters and open clusters are not the same the fact that the elements are made in stars over time explains an important difference between globular and open clusters.