[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page373_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page373_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 374 figure 454: background radio noise component 191 – what frequency to use to search? if we are going to search for communications from extraterrestrial intelligence, the question is which frequencies are the best options. if the messages are coming over great distances, then we need a frequency that will penetrate dust and gas easily. this pushes us to the radio frequencies. then we need to consider sources of noise. figure 454 is a graph showing the various forms of radio noise that we receive on earth. the blue line is the cosmic microwave background radiation. the purple line is the non-thermal background radiation, and the green line is the quantum limit. the orange line is the radio noise generated by the atmosphere. note the peaks related to oxygen molecules and water molecules. the red line is the sum of all these sources of noise. the goal is to use the quietest part of the radio spectrum. this would be the lowest parts of the red line.
this portion of the red line contains the emission frequencies for the hydrogen atom (21-cm radiation) and the hydroxyl molecule (18-cm radiation). this has prompted the name for this regions as the water hole. this reasoning makes sense to us humans, but may not be the same reasoning that extraterrestrials would use. their atmosphere could be very different from ours, and if so, their minima may be in a different part of the radio spectrum. many civilizations of extraterrestrials could be beaming communications towards us right now. our challenge is to find the right frequency and the right direction in the sky to point our radio antennas. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page374_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 375 appendix 1: – math for mere mortal astronomers astronomy is a science and yes, it is physics. all sciences and especially physics rely heavily on mathematics. but in introductory astronomy the math is at a reasonable level. but it is a bit more intensive than the stuff we learned in elementary school. this appendix is designed to give you the fundamental tools necessary to do the homework in planetary and stellar astronomy.
if you are a math wizard, then you don’t need this appendix. if you already understand the methodology of an item, then you can skip on to the next one. addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division we are assuming that you are comfortable with these mathematical functions. if not, please talk with your instructor. with the plethora of low cost and well equipped calculators that are available, there is no need to do any of these functions long-hand in this class. how many decimal places? if you are using a calculator, then it will calculate as many decimal places as it has room for on the display. this is a wonderful feature, but it is excessive. you are plugging numbers into the calculator, or into an equation. your result will be no more accurate than the numbers you start with. so if you are asked “what is the size of the floor in the room you are in now?” if you don’t measure, you might say it is 15 feet by 20 feet. both of these numbers have two digits and no decimal places. your answer to an equation using these numbers should have no decimal places either.
if you were to measure and you find the room is 14.5 feet by 23 feet, then you have either one decimal place (the 5 to the right on the decimal in the first number) or zero decimal places. at most your answer should have one decimal place. rounding. if your calculator gives you more than that, then you need to round off the answer. rounding is what it is called when you need to decide what the rightmost digit of our answer should be. so with 14.5 and 23 you use an equation and get a result of 1.875. this is too many decimal places. you only want one. so you start with the 1.8 and then we have to decide do we round up or down. rounding up would give you 1.9. rounding down would give you 1.8. you ignore all of the decimal places except the next one to the right. in this case, it is a 7. you ignore the 5, so you have 1.87. if the number in that extra decimal place is 5 or larger, then you round up. if it is 4 or less, then you round down.