a: modification of work by nasa goddard/university of arizona; credit b: modification of work by nasa goddard/university of arizona the most ambitious asteroid space mission (called dawn) has visited the two largest main belt asteroids, ceres and vesta, orbiting each for about a year (figure 13.11). their large sizes (diameters of about 1000 and 500 kilometers, respectively) make them appropriate for comparison with the planets and large moons. both turned out to be heavily cratered, implying their surfaces are old. on vesta, we have now actually located the large impact craters that ejected the basaltic meteorites previously identified as coming from this asteroid. these craters are so large that they sample several layers of vesta’s crustal material. figure 13.11 vesta and ceres. the nasa dawn spacecraft took these images of the large asteroids (a) vesta and (b) ceres. (a) note that vesta is not round, as ceres (which is considered a dwarf planet) is. a mountain twice the height of mt. everest on earth is visible at the very bottom of the vesta image.
(b) the image of ceres has its colors exaggerated to bring out differences in composition. you can see a white feature in occator crater near the center of the image. (credit a, b: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/ucla/ mps/dlr/ida) ceres has not had a comparable history of giant impacts, so its surface is covered with craters that look more like those from the lunar highlands. one big surprise at ceres is the presence of very bright white spots, associated primarily with the central peaks of large craters (figure 13.12). the light-colored mineral is primarily salt, released from the interior. after repeated close flybys, data from the nasa dawn spacecraft indicated that ceres has (or has had) a subsurface ocean of water, with occasional eruptions on the surface. the most dramatic is the 4 kilometer tall ice volcano called ahuna mons (see figure 13.12).
444 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page462_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page462_img2.jpeg] figure 13.12 white spots in a larger crater on ceres. white spots in a larger crater on ceres. (a) these bright features appear to be salt deposits in a ceres crater called occator, which is 92 kilometers across. (b) ahuna mons is an isolated mountain on ceres, 4 kilometers high. it is thought to be an intrusion of ice from the interior. (credit a: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/ucla/ mps/dlr/ida; credit b: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/ucla/mps/dlr/ida/psi) lucy is a nasa mission to explore a category of solar system objects, the trojan asteroids, that have not been explored before. the trojans are found in two large clouds that precede and follow jupiter in its orbit around the sun (figure 13.2).
because they are so far from both earth and jupiter, they have never been visited by spacecraft, and some scientists speculate that they were formed separately from other asteroids. lucy was launched in 2021 on a 12-year journey that will take it out to one group of trojans, then return to near earth for a gravity boost to the other group, visiting eight asteroids in all. it has a powerful set of remote instruments such as imagers and spectrometers, to characterize the composition and geology of each target. no one knows what it may teach us about the evolution of the solar system. a note about the quirky names assigned by astronomers: both families of trojan asteroids are named for participants in the trojan wars of greek mythology, in which the greeks fought the trojans. the ones in the group that precede jupiter are assigned the names of greek heroes, while the ones that follow jupiter are assigned heroes from troy.