you are captured by space aliens, who take you inside a complex cloud of interstellar gas, dust, and a few newly formed stars. to escape, you need to make a map of the cloud. luckily, the aliens have a complete astronomical observatory with equipment for measuring all the bands of the electromagnetic spectrum. using what you have learned in this chapter, have your group discuss what kinds of maps you would make of the cloud to plot your most effective escape route. b. the diagram that herschel made of the milky way has a very irregular outer boundary (see figure 25.3). can your group think of a reason for this? how did herschel construct his map? c. suppose that for your final exam in this course, your group is assigned telescope time to observe a star selected for you by your professor. the professor tells you the position of the star in the sky (its right ascension and declination) but nothing else. you can make any observations you wish. how would you go about determining whether the star is a member of population i or population ii? d. the existence of dark matter comes as a great surprise, and its nature remains a mystery today.
someday astronomers will know a lot more about it (you can learn more about current findings in the evolution and distribution of galaxies). can your group make a list of earlier astronomical observations that began as a surprise and mystery, but wound up (with more observations) as well-understood parts of introductory textbooks? e. physicist gregory benford has written a series of science fiction novels that take place near the center of the milky way galaxy in the far future. suppose your group were writing such a story. make a list of ways that the environment near the galactic center differs from the environment in the “galactic suburbs,” where the sun is located. would life as we know it have an easier or harder time surviving on planets that orbit stars near the center (and why)? f. these days, in most urban areas, city lights completely swamp the faint light of the milky way in our skies. have each member of your group survey 5 to 10 friends or relatives (you could spread out on campus to investigate or use social media or the phone), explaining what the milky way is and then asking if they have seen it. also ask their age. report back to your group and discuss your reactions to the survey.
is there any relationship between a person’s age and whether they have seen the milky way? how important is it that many kids growing up on earth today never (or rarely) get to see our home galaxy in the sky? exercises review questions 1. explain why we see the milky way as a faint band of light stretching across the sky. 894 25 • collaborative group activities access for free at openstax.org 2. explain where in a spiral galaxy you would expect to find globular clusters, molecular clouds, and atomic hydrogen. 3. describe several characteristics that distinguish population i stars from population ii stars. 4. briefly describe the main parts of our galaxy. 5. describe the evidence indicating that a black hole may be at the center of our galaxy. 6. explain why the abundances of heavy elements in stars correlate with their positions in the galaxy. 7. what will be the long-term future of our galaxy? thought questions 8. suppose the milky way was a band of light extending only halfway around the sky (that is, in a semicircle). what, then, would you conclude about the sun’s location in the galaxy? give your reasoning. 9.
suppose somebody proposed that rather than invoking dark matter to explain the increased orbital velocities of stars beyond the sun’s orbit, the problem could be solved by assuming that the milky way’s central black hole was much more massive. does simply increasing the assumed mass of the milky way’s central supermassive black hole correctly resolve the issue of unexpectedly high orbital velocities in the galaxy? why or why not? 10. the globular clusters revolve around the galaxy in highly elliptical orbits. where would you expect the clusters to spend most of their time? (think of kepler’s laws.) at any given time, would you expect most globular clusters to be moving at high or low speeds with respect to the center of the galaxy? why? 11. shapley used the positions of globular clusters to determine the location of the galactic center. could he have used open clusters? why or why not? 12. consider the following five kinds of objects: open cluster, giant molecular cloud, globular cluster, group of o and b stars, and planetary nebulae. a. which occur only in spiral arms? b. which occur only in the parts of the galaxy other than the spiral arms? c. which are thought to be very young?