in december of 2024, the nasa parker solar probe became the first human-built object to fly through the sun's outer corona and make scientific measurements, approaching within 6 million kilometers above our star's photosphere. there is a special heat shield on the craft to allow it to survive its close approaches to the sun. the sun's gravity sped up the probe to an orbital speed of 692,000 km/hour, making it the fastest vehicle humans have ever flown. visit this nasa website (https://openstax.org/l/30nasavehicle) for more on the mission and what it is learning about the sun's atmosphere. link to learning 518 15 • the sun: a garden-variety star access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page536_img1.jpeg] the solar wind one of the most remarkable discoveries about the sun’s atmosphere is that it produces a stream of charged particles (mainly protons and electrons) that we call the solar wind. these particles flow outward from the sun into the solar system at a speed of about 400 kilometers per second (almost 1 million miles per hour)!
the solar wind exists because the gases in the corona are so hot and moving so rapidly that they cannot be held back by solar gravity. (this wind was actually discovered by its effects on the charged tails of comets; in a sense, we can see the comet tails blow in the solar breeze the way wind socks at an airport or curtains in an open window flutter on earth.) although the solar wind material is very, very rarified (i.e., extremely low density), the sun has an enormous surface area. astronomers estimate that the sun is losing about 1–2 million tons of material each second through this wind. although this sounds like a lot, it’s so trivial compared to the enormous mass of the sun that it can be neglected as we study the sun. from where in the sun does the solar wind emerge? in visible photographs, the solar corona appears fairly uniform and smooth. x-ray and extreme ultraviolet pictures, however, show that the corona has loops, plumes, and both bright and dark regions. large dark regions of the corona that are relatively cool and quiet are called coronal holes (figure 15.11).
in these regions, magnetic field lines stretch far out into space away from the sun, rather than looping back to the surface. the solar wind comes predominantly from coronal holes, where gas can stream away from the sun into space unhindered by magnetic fields. hot coronal gas, on the other hand, is present mainly where magnetic fields have trapped and concentrated it. figure 15.11 coronal hole. the dark area visible near the sun’s south pole on this solar dynamics observatory spacecraft image is a coronal hole. (credit: modification of work by nasa/sdo) at the surface of earth, we are protected to some degree from the solar wind by our atmosphere and earth’s magnetic field (see earth as a planet). however, the magnetic field lines come into earth at the north and south magnetic poles. here, charged particles accelerated by the solar wind can follow the field down into our atmosphere. as the particles strike molecules of air, they cause them to glow, producing beautiful curtains of light called the auroras, or the northern and southern lights (figure 15.12). 15.1 • the structure and composition of the sun 519 [image: astronomy_openstax_page537_img1.jpeg] figure 15.12 aurora.
this dramatic nasa image was taken in delta junction, alaska, on april 10, 2015 by sebastian saarloos. (credit: "purple and green aurora in alaska" by sebastian saarloos/nasa, public domain) this nasa video (https://openstax.org/l/30aurora) explains and demonstrates the nature of the auroras and their relationship to earth’s magnetic field. 15.2 the solar cycle learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: before the invention of the telescope, the sun was thought to be an unchanging and perfect sphere. we now know that the sun is in a perpetual state of change: its surface is a seething, bubbling cauldron of hot gas. areas that are darker and cooler than the rest of the surface come and go. vast plumes of gas erupt into the chromosphere and corona. occasionally, there are even giant explosions on the sun that send enormous streamers of charged particles and energy hurtling toward earth. when they arrive, these can cause power outages and other serious effects on our planet.