its striking appearance is due to the fact that, since it is relatively close to earth, there are no bright stars between us and it, and its dust obscures the light from the stars behind it. (it looks a little bit like a sideways heart; one astronomer sent a photo of this object to his sweetheart as a valentine.) (credit: modification of work by eso) dusty clouds in space betray their presence in several ways: by blocking the light from distant stars, by emitting energy in the infrared part of the spectrum, by reflecting the light from nearby stars, and by making distant stars look redder than they really are. edward emerson barnard born in 1857 in nashville, tennessee, two months after his father died, edward barnard (figure 20.10) grew up in such poor circumstances that he had to drop out of school at age nine to help support his ailing mother.
he soon became an assistant to a local photographer, where he learned to love both photography describe how we can detect interstellar dust understand the role and importance of infrared observations in studying dust explain the terms extinction and interstellar reddening voyagers in astronomy 20.3 • cosmic dust 679 [image: astronomy_openstax_page697_img1.jpeg] and astronomy, destined to become the dual passions of his life. he worked as a photographer’s aide for 17 years, studying astronomy on his own. in 1883, he obtained a job as an assistant at the vanderbilt university observatory, which enabled him at last to take some astronomy courses. married in 1881, barnard built a house for his family that he could ill afford. but as it happened, a patent medicine manufacturer offered a $200 prize (a lot of money in those days) for the discovery of any new comet. with the determination that became characteristic of him, barnard spent every clear night searching for comets. he discovered seven of them between 1881 and 1887, earning enough money to make the payments on his home; this “comet house” later became a local attraction.
(by the end of his life, barnard had found 17 comets through diligent observation.) in 1887, barnard got a position at the newly founded lick observatory, where he soon locked horns with the director, edward holden, a blustering administrator who made barnard’s life miserable. (to be fair, barnard soon tried to do the same for him.) despite being denied the telescope time that he needed for his photographic work, in 1892, barnard managed to discover the first new moon found around jupiter since galileo’s day, a stunning observational feat that earned him world renown. now in a position to demand more telescope time, he perfected his photographic techniques and soon began to publish the best images of the milky way taken up to that time. it was during the course of this work that he began to examine the dark regions among the crowded star lanes of the galaxy and to realize that they must be vast clouds of obscuring material (rather than “holes” in the distribution of stars). astronomer-historian donald osterbrock has called barnard an “observaholic:” his daily mood seemed to depend entirely on how clear the sky promised to be for his night of observing.
he was a driven, neurotic man, concerned about his lack of formal training, fearful of being scorned, and afraid that he might somehow slip back into the poverty of his younger days. he had difficulty taking vacations and lived for his work: only serious illness could deter him from making astronomical observations. in 1895, barnard, having had enough of the political battles at lick, accepted a job at the yerkes observatory near chicago, where he remained until his death in 1923. he continued his photographic work, publishing compilations of his images that became classic photographic atlases, and investigating the varieties of nebulae revealed in his photographs. he also made measurements of the sizes and features of planets, participated in observations of solar eclipses, and carefully cataloged dark nebulae (see figure 20.9). in 1916, he discovered the star with the largest proper motion, the second-closest star system to our own (see analyzing starlight). it is now called barnard’s star in his honor. figure 20.10 edward emerson barnard (1857–1923). barnard’s observations provided information that furthered many astronomical explorations.