some infrared and microwaves are absorbed by water and thus are best observed from high altitudes. low- frequency radio waves are blocked by earth’s ionosphere. (credit: modification of work by stsci/jhu/nasa) types of electromagnetic radiation electromagnetic radiation with the shortest wavelengths, no longer than 0.01 nanometer, is categorized as gamma rays (1 nanometer = 10–9 meters; see appendix d). the name gamma comes from the third letter of the greek alphabet: gamma rays were the third kind of radiation discovered coming from radioactive atoms understand the bands of the electromagnetic spectrum and how they differ from one another understand how each part of the spectrum interacts with earth’s atmosphere explain how and why the light emitted by an object depends on its temperature 5.2 • the electromagnetic spectrum 149 [image: astronomy_openstax_page167_img1.jpeg] when physicists first investigated their behavior. because gamma rays carry a lot of energy, they can be dangerous for living tissues. gamma radiation is generated deep in the interior of stars, as well as by some of the most violent phenomena in the universe, such as the deaths of stars and the merging of stellar corpses.
gamma rays coming to earth are absorbed by our atmosphere before they reach the ground (which is a good thing for our health); thus, they can only be studied directly using instruments in space. electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths between 0.01 nanometer and 20 nanometers is referred to as x- rays. being more energetic than visible light, x-rays are able to penetrate soft tissues but not bones, and so allow us to make images of the shadows of the bones inside us. while x-rays can penetrate a short length of human flesh, they are stopped by the large numbers of atoms in earth’s atmosphere with which they interact. thus, x-ray astronomy (like gamma-ray astronomy) could not develop until we invented ways of sending instruments above our atmosphere (figure 5.7). figure 5.7 x-ray sky. this is a map of the sky tuned to certain types of x-rays (seen from above earth’s atmosphere). the map tilts the sky so that the disk of our milky way galaxy runs across its center. it was constructed and artificially colored from data gathered by the european rosat satellite. each color (red, yellow, and blue) shows x-rays of different frequencies or energies.
for example, red outlines the glow from a hot local bubble of gas all around us, blown by one or more exploding stars in our cosmic vicinity. yellow and blue show more distant sources of x-rays, such as remnants of other exploded stars or the active center of our galaxy (in the middle of the picture). (credit: modification of work by nasa) radiation intermediate between x-rays and visible light is ultraviolet (meaning higher energy than violet). outside the world of science, ultraviolet light is sometimes called “black light” because our eyes cannot see it. ultraviolet radiation is mostly blocked by the ozone layer of earth’s atmosphere, but a small fraction of ultraviolet rays from our sun do penetrate to cause sunburn or, in extreme cases of overexposure, skin cancer in human beings. ultraviolet astronomy is also best done from space. electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths between roughly 400 and 700 nm is called visible light because these are the waves that human vision can perceive. this is also the band of the electromagnetic spectrum that most readily reaches earth’s surface. these two observations are not coincidental: human eyes evolved to see the kinds of waves that arrive from the sun most effectively.
visible light penetrates earth’s atmosphere effectively, except when it is temporarily blocked by clouds. between visible light and radio waves are the wavelengths of infrared or heat radiation. astronomer william herschel first discovered infrared in 1800 while trying to measure the temperatures of different colors of sunlight spread out into a spectrum. he noticed that when he accidently positioned his thermometer beyond the reddest color, it still registered heating due to some invisible energy coming from the sun. this was the first hint about the existence of the other (invisible) bands of the electromagnetic spectrum, although it would take many decades for our full understanding to develop. a heat lamp radiates mostly infrared radiation, and the nerve endings in our skin are sensitive to this band of the electromagnetic spectrum. infrared waves are absorbed by water and carbon dioxide molecules, which are 150 5 • radiation and spectra access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page168_img1.jpeg] more concentrated low in earth’s atmosphere. for this reason, infrared astronomy is best done from high mountaintops, high-flying airplanes, and spacecraft. after infrared comes the familiar microwave, used in short-wave communication and microwave ovens.