these shocks keep some interstellar space filled with gas at temperatures of millions of degrees, and they continually disturb the colder gas, keeping it in constant, turbulent motion. molecular clouds a few simple molecules out in space, such as cn and ch, were discovered decades ago because they produce absorption lines in the visible-light spectra of stars behind them. when more sophisticated equipment for obtaining spectra in radio and infrared wavelengths became available, astronomers—to their surprise—found much more complex molecules in interstellar clouds as well. just as atoms leave their “fingerprints” in the spectrum of visible light, so the vibration and rotation of atoms within molecules can leave spectral fingerprints in radio and infrared waves. if we spread out the radiation at such longer wavelengths, we can detect emission or absorption lines in the spectra that are characteristic of specific molecules. over the years, experiments in our laboratories have shown us the exact wavelengths associated with changes in the rotation and vibration of many common molecules, giving us a template of possible lines against which we can now compare our observations of interstellar matter. the discovery of complex molecules in space came as a surprise because most of interstellar space is filled with ultraviolet light from stars, and this light is capable of dissociating molecules (breaking them apart into individual atoms).
in retrospect, however, the presence of molecules is not surprising. as we will discuss further in the next section, and have already seen above, interstellar space also contains significant amounts of dust capable of blocking out starlight. when this dust accumulates in a single location, the result is a dark cloud where ultraviolet starlight is blocked and molecules can survive. the largest of these structures are created where gravity pulls interstellar gas together to form giant molecular clouds, structures as massive as a million times the mass of the sun. within these, most of the interstellar hydrogen has formed the molecule h2 (molecular hydrogen). other, more complex molecules are also present in much smaller quantities. giant molecular clouds have densities of hundreds to thousands of atoms per cm3, much denser than interstellar space is on average. as a result, though they account for a very small fraction of the volume of interstellar space, they contain a significant fraction—20–30%—of the total mass of the milky way’s gas.
676 20 • between the stars: gas and dust in space access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page694_img1.jpeg] because of their high density, molecular clouds block ultraviolet starlight, the main agent for heating most interstellar gas. as a result, they tend to be extremely cold, with typical temperatures near 10 k (−263 °c). giant molecular clouds are also the sites where new stars form, as we will discuss below. it is in these dark regions of space, protected from starlight, that molecules can form. chemical reactions occurring both in the gas and on the surface of dust grains lead to much more complex compounds, hundreds of which have been identified in interstellar space. among the simplest of these are water (h2o), carbon monoxide (co), which is produced by fires on earth, and ammonia (nh3), whose smell you recognize in strong home cleaning products. carbon monoxide is particularly abundant in interstellar space and is the primary tool that astronomers use to study giant molecular clouds. unfortunately, the most abundant molecule, h2, is particularly difficult to observe directly because in most giant molecular clouds, it is too cold to emit even at radio wavelengths.
co, which tends to be present wherever h2 is found, is a much better emitter and is often used by astronomers to trace molecular hydrogen. the more complex molecules astronomers have found are mostly combinations of hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur atoms. many of these molecules are organic (those that contain carbon and are associated with the carbon chemistry of life on earth.) they include formaldehyde (used to preserve living tissues), alcohol (see the feature box on cocktails in space), and antifreeze. in 1996, astronomers discovered acetic acid (the prime ingredient of vinegar) in a cloud lying in the direction of the constellation of sagittarius. to balance the sour with the sweet, a simple sugar (glycolaldehyde) has also been found. the largest compounds yet discovered in interstellar space are fullerenes, molecules in which 60 or 70 carbon atoms are arranged in a cage-like configuration (see figure 20.8). see table 20.1 for a list of a few of the more interesting interstellar molecules that have been found so far. figure 20.8 fullerene c60. this three-dimensional perspective shows the characteristic cage-like arrangement of the 60 carbon atoms in a molecule of fullerene c60.