13.3 • the “long-haired” comets 457 figure 13.24 comet 67p’s strange shape and surface features. (a) this image from the rosetta camera was taken from a distance of 285 kilometers. the resolution is 5 meters. you can see that the comet consists of two sections with a connecting “neck” between them. (b) this close-up view of comet churyumov-gerasimenko is from the philae lander. one of the lander’s three feet is visible in the foreground. the lander itself is mostly in shadow. (credit a: modification of work by esa/rosetta/mps for osiris team mps/upd/ lam/iaa/sso/inta/upm/dasp/ida; credit b: modification of work by esa/rosetta/philae/civa) the double-lobed shape of 67p’s nucleus has been tentatively attributed to the collision and merger of two independent comet nuclei long ago. the spacecraft verified that the comet’s dark surface was covered with organic carbon-rich compounds, mixed with sulfides and iron-nickel grains.
67p has an average density of only 0.5 g/cm3 (recall water in these units has a density of 1 g/cm3.) this low density indicates that the comet is quite porous, that is, there is a large amount of empty space among its materials. we already knew that the evaporation of comet ices was sporadic and limited to small jets, but in comet 67p, this was carried to an extreme. at any one time, more than 99% of the surface is inactive. the active vents are only a few meters across, with the material confined to narrow jets that persist for just a few minutes (figure 13.25). the level of activity is strongly dependent on solar heating, and between july and august 2015, it increased by a factor of 10. isotopic analysis of deuterium in the water ejected by the comet shows that it is different from the water found on earth. thus, apparently comets like 67p did not contribute to the origin of our oceans or the water in our bodies, as some scientists had thought. figure 13.25 gas jets on comet 67p.
(a and b) jet activity was photographed by the rosetta spacecraft near perihelion. you can see a jet suddenly appearing; it was active for only a few minutes. (c) this spectacular photo, taken near perihelion, shows the active comet surrounded by multiple jets of gas and dust. (credit a, b: modification of work by esa/rosetta/mps; credit c: modification of work by esa/rosetta/navcam) the european space agency is continuing to make interesting short videos (https://openstax.org/l/ link to learning 458 13 • comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page476_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page476_img2.jpeg] 30esavideoros) illustrating the challenges and results of the rosetta and philae missions. for example, watch “rosetta’s moment in the sun” to see some of the images of the comet generating plumes of gas and dust and hear about some of the dangers an active comet poses for the spacecraft.
13.4 the origin and fate of comets and related objects learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the comets we notice when they come near earth (especially the ones coming for the first time) are probably the most primitive objects we can study, preserved unchanged for billions of years in the deep freeze of the outer solar system. however, astronomers have discovered many other objects that orbit the sun beyond the planets. centaurs and tnos in the outer solar system, where most objects contain large amounts of water ice, the distinction between asteroids and comets breaks down. astronomers initially still used the name “asteroids” for new objects discovered going around the sun with orbits that carry them far beyond jupiter. the first of these objects is chiron, found in 1977 on a path that carries it from just inside the orbit of saturn at its closest approach to the sun out to almost the distance of uranus (figure 13.26). the diameter of chiron is estimated to be about 200 kilometers, much larger than any known comet. figure 13.26 chiron’s orbit.