because pluto is a few degrees warmer than triton, its atmospheric pressure is about ten times greater. this atmosphere contains several distinct haze layers, presumably caused by photochemical reactions, like those in titan’s atmosphere (figure 12.20). figure 12.20 haze layers in the atmosphere of pluto. this is one of the highest-resolution photos of pluto, taken by the new horizons spacecraft 15 minutes after its closest approach. it shows 12 layers of haze. note also the range of mountains with heights up to 3500 meters. (credit: modification of work by nasa/johns hopkins university applied physics laboratory/southwest research institute) reaching pluto with a spacecraft was a major challenge, especially in an era when reduced nasa budgets could not support large, expensive missions like galileo and cassini. yet like galileo and cassini, a pluto mission would require a nuclear electric system that used the heat from plutonium to generate the energy to power the instruments and keep them operating far from the warmth of the sun. nasa made available one of the last of its nuclear generators for such a mission.
assuming an affordable but highly capable spacecraft could be built, there was still the problem of getting to pluto, nearly 5 billion kilometers from earth, without waiting decades. the answer was to use jupiter’s gravity to slingshot the spacecraft toward pluto. the 2006 launch of new horizons started the mission with a high speed, and the jupiter flyby just a year later gave it the required additional boost. the new horizons spacecraft arrived at pluto in july 2015, traveling at a relative speed of 14 kilometers per second (or about 50,000 kilometers per hour). with this high speed, the entire flyby sequence was compressed into just one day. most of the data recorded near closest approach link to learning 12.4 • pluto and charon 413 [image: astronomy_openstax_page431_img1.jpeg] could not be transmitted to earth until many months later, but when it finally arrived, astronomers were rewarded with a treasure trove of images and data. geology of pluto pluto is not the geologically dead world that many anticipated for such a small object—far from it.
the division of the surface into areas with different composition and surface texture is apparent in the global color photo shown in figure 12.21. the reddish color is enhanced in this image to bring out differences in color more clearly. the darker parts of the surface are cratered, but adjacent to them is a nearly featureless light area in the lower right quadrant of this image. this is a huge ice-filled depression called the sputnik plains, named for the first artificial earth satellite. the absence of impact craters suggests a surface no more than 10 million years old. the dark areas show the colors of photochemical haze or smog similar to that in the atmosphere of titan. the dark material that is staining these old surfaces could come from pluto’s atmospheric haze or from chemical reactions taking place at the surface due to the action of sunlight. figure 12.21 global color image of pluto. this new horizons image clearly shows the variety of terrains on pluto. the dark area in the lower left is covered with impact craters, while the large light area in the center and lower right is a flat basin devoid of craters. the colors you see are somewhat enhanced to bring out subtle differences.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/johns hopkins university applied physics laboratory/southwest research institute) figure 12.22 shows some of the remarkable variety of surface features new horizons revealed. we are finding on pluto. toward the right on this image, we see the shoreline of the sputnik plains, showing evidence of relatively recent geological activity. the nitrogen and carbon monoxide ice that fills the sputnik depression shows cells or polygons with an average width of more than 30 kilometers, caused by slow convection in the ice.2 2 in the process of convection, warmer material rises and colder material sinks, transferring energy. you are probably more familiar with convection in warm fluids, like the cells you see when you are heating some kinds of soup, but it can also happen (very slowly) in colder substances. 414 12 • rings, moons, and pluto access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page432_img1.jpeg] figure 12.22 diversity of terrain on pluto. this enhanced color view of a strip of pluto’s surface about 80 kilometers long shows a variety of different surface features.