today, these satellites are used for weather tracking, ecology, global positioning systems, communications, and military purposes, to name a few uses. most satellites are launched into low earth orbit, since this requires the minimum launch energy. at the orbital speed of 8 kilometers per second, they circle the planet in about 90 minutes. some of the very low earth orbits are not indefinitely stable because, as earth’s atmosphere swells from time to time, a frictional drag is generated by the atmosphere on these satellites, eventually leading to a loss of energy and “decay” of the orbit. link to learning 88 3 • orbits and gravity access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page106_img1.jpeg] figure 3.12 satellites in earth orbit. this figure shows the larger pieces of orbital debris that are being tracked by nasa in earth’s orbit. (credit: nasa/jsc) interplanetary spacecraft the exploration of the solar system has been carried out largely by robot spacecraft sent to the other planets. to escape earth, these craft must achieve escape speed, the speed needed to move away from earth forever, which is about 11 kilometers per second (about 25,000 miles per hour).
after escaping earth, these craft coast to their targets, subject only to minor trajectory adjustments provided by small thruster rockets on board. in interplanetary flight, these spacecraft follow orbits around the sun that are modified only when they pass near one of the planets. as it comes close to its target, a spacecraft is deflected by the planet’s gravitational force into a modified orbit, either gaining or losing energy in the process. spacecraft controllers have actually been able to use a planet’s gravity to redirect a flyby spacecraft to a second target. for example, voyager 2 used a series of gravity- assisted encounters to yield successive flybys of jupiter (1979), saturn (1980), uranus (1986), and neptune (1989). the galileo spacecraft, launched in 1989, flew past venus once and earth twice to gain the energy required to reach its ultimate goal of orbiting jupiter. if we wish to orbit a planet, we must slow the spacecraft with a rocket when the spacecraft is near its destination, allowing it to be captured into an elliptical orbit. additional rocket thrust is required to bring a vehicle down from orbit for a landing on the surface.
finally, if a return trip to earth is planned, the landed payload must include enough propulsive power to repeat the entire process in reverse. 3.5 • motions of satellites and spacecraft 89 [image: astronomy_openstax_page107_img1.jpeg] 3.6 gravity with more than two bodies learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: until now, we have considered the sun and a planet (or a planet and one of its moons) as nothing more than a pair of bodies revolving around each other. in fact, all the planets exert gravitational forces upon one another as well. these interplanetary attractions cause slight variations from the orbits than would be expected if the gravitational forces between planets were neglected. the motion of a body that is under the gravitational influence of two or more other bodies is very complicated and can be calculated properly only with large computers. fortunately, astronomers have such computers at their disposal in universities and government research institutes. the interactions of many bodies as an example, suppose you have a cluster of a thousand stars all orbiting a common center (such clusters are quite common, as we shall see in star clusters).
if we know the exact position of each star at any given instant, we can calculate the combined gravitational force of the entire group on any one member of the cluster. knowing the force on the star in question, we can therefore find how it will accelerate. if we know how it was moving to begin with, we can then calculate how it will move in the next instant of time, thus tracking its motion. however, the problem is complicated by the fact that the other stars are also moving and thus changing the effect they will have on our star. therefore, we must simultaneously calculate the acceleration of each star produced by the combination of the gravitational attractions of all the others in order to track the motions of all of them, and hence of any one. such complex calculations have been carried out with modern computers to track the evolution of hypothetical clusters of stars with up to a million members (figure 3.13). figure 3.13 modern computing power. these supercomputers at nasa’s ames research center are capable of tracking the motions of more than a million objects under their mutual gravitation. (credit: nasa ames research center/pleiades) within the solar system, the problem of computing the orbits of planets and spacecraft is somewhat simpler.