when compared to these outer giants, the little cinders of rock and metal that orbit closer to the sun can seem insignificant. these four giant worlds—jupiter, saturn, uranus, neptune—are the subjects of this chapter. their rings, moons, and the dwarf planet pluto are discussed in a later chapter. the giant planets 11 [image: astronomy_openstax_page383_img1.jpeg] 11.1 exploring the outer planets learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the giant planets hold most of the mass in our planetary system. jupiter alone exceeds the mass of all the other planets combined (figure 11.2). the material available to build these planets can be divided into three classes by what they are made of: “gases,” “ices,” and “rocks” (see table 11.1). the “gases” are primarily hydrogen and helium, the most abundant elements in the universe. the way it is used here, the term “ices” refers to composition only and not whether a substance is actually in a solid state. “ices” means compounds that form from the next most abundant elements: oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen.
common ices are water, methane, and ammonia, but ices may also include carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and others. “rocks” are even less abundant than ices, and include everything else: magnesium, silicon, iron, and so on. figure 11.2 jupiter. the cassini spacecraft imaged jupiter on its way to saturn in 2012. the giant storm system called the great red spot is visible to the lower right. the dark spot to the lower left is the shadow of jupiter’s moon europa.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl) abundances in the outer solar system type of material name approximate % (by mass) gas hydrogen (h2) 75 gas helium (he) 24 ice water (h2o) 0.6 ice methane (ch4) 0.4 table 11.1 provide an overview of the composition of the giant planets chronicle the robotic exploration of the outer solar system summarize the missions sent to orbit the gas giants 366 11 • the giant planets access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page384_img1.jpeg] type of material name approximate % (by mass) ice ammonia (nh3) 0.1 rock magnesium (mg), iron (fe), silicon (si) 0.3 table 11.1 in the outer solar system, gases dominate the two largest planets, jupiter and saturn, hence their nickname “gas giants.” uranus and neptune are sometimes called “ice giants” because their interiors contain far more of the “ice” component than their larger cousins. the chemistry for all four giant planet atmospheres is dominated by hydrogen.
this hydrogen caused the chemistry of the outer solar system to become reducing, meaning that other elements tend to combine with hydrogen first. in the early solar system, most of the oxygen combined with hydrogen to make h2o and was thus unavailable to form the kinds of oxidized compounds with other elements that are more familiar to us in the inner solar system (such as co2). as a result, the compounds detected in the atmosphere of the giant planets are mostly hydrogen-based gases such as methane (ch4) and ammonia (nh3), or more complex hydrocarbons (combinations of hydrogen and carbon) such as ethane (c2h6) and acetylene (c2h2). exploration of the outer solar system so far eight spacecraft, seven from the united states and one from europe, have penetrated beyond the asteroid belt into the realm of the giants. table 11.2 summarizes the spacecraft missions to the outer solar system.