now headquartered at oxford university in england, the program’s aim is to search more stars and more channels than any seti project so far. what kind of signals do we hope to pick up? we on earth are inadvertently sending out a flood of radio signals, dominated by military radar systems. this is a kind of leakage signal, similar to the wasted light energy that is beamed upward by poorly designed streetlights and advertising signs. could we detect a similar leakage of radio signals from another civilization? the answer is just barely, but only for the nearest stars. for the most part, therefore, current radio seti searches are looking for beacons, assuming that civilizations might be 1080 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1098_img1.jpeg] intentionally drawing attention to themselves or perhaps sending a message to another world or outpost that lies in our direction. our prospects for success depend on how often civilizations arise, how long they last, and how patient they are about broadcasting their locations to the cosmos.
jill tarter: trying to make contact 1997 was quite a year for jill cornell tarter (figure 30.20), one of the world’s leading scientists in the seti field. the seti institute announced that she would be the recipient of its first endowed chair (the equivalent of an endowed research professorship) named in honor of bernard oliver. the national science foundation approved a proposal by a group of scientists and educators she headed to develop an innovative hands-on high school curriculum based on the ideas of cosmic evolution (the topics of this chapter). and, at roughly the same time, she was being besieged with requests for media interviews as news reports identified her as the model for ellie arroway, the protagonist of contact, carl sagan’s best-selling novel about seti. the book had been made into a high-budget science fiction film, starring jodie foster, who had talked with tarter before taking the role.
figure 30.20 jill tarter (credit: christian schidlowski) tarter is quick to point out, “carl sagan wrote a book about a woman who does what i do, not about me.” still, as the only woman in such a senior position in the small field of seti, she was the center of a great deal of public attention. (however, colleagues and reporters pointed out that this was nothing compared to what would happen if her search for radio signals from other civilizations recorded a success.) being the only woman in a group is not a new situation to tarter, who often found herself the only woman in her advanced science or math classes. her father had encouraged her, both in her interest in science and her “tinkering.” as an undergraduate at cornell university, she majored in engineering physics. that training became key to putting together and maintaining the complex systems that automatically scan for signals from other civilizations. switching to astrophysics for her graduate studies, she wrote a phd thesis that, among other topics, considered the formation of failed stars—those whose mass was not sufficient to ignite the nuclear reactions that power more massive stars like our own sun.
tarter coined the term “brown dwarf” for these small, dim objects, and it has remained the name astronomers use ever since. it was while she was still in graduate school that stuart bowyer, one of her professors at the university of california, berkeley, asked her if she wanted to be involved in a small experiment to siphon off a bit of radiation from a radio telescope as astronomers used it year in and year out and see if there was any hint of voyagers in astronomy 30.4 • the search for extraterrestrial intelligence 1081 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1099_img1.jpeg] an intelligently coded radio message buried in the radio noise. her engineering and computer programming skills became essential to the project, and soon she was hooked on the search for life elsewhere. thus began an illustrious career working full time searching for what she calls the technosignatures (signs of technology) from extraterrestrial civilizations. tarter has received many awards, including being elected fellow of the american association for the advancement of science in 2002, the adler planetarium women in space science award in 2003, and a 2009 ted prize.