but when we try to look through the atmosphere deeper into the sun, our view is blocked. the photosphere is the layer where the sun becomes opaque and marks the boundary past which we cannot see (figure 15.5). figure 15.5 solar photosphere plus sunspots. this photograph shows the photosphere—the visible surface of the sun. also shown is an enlarged image of a group of sunspots; the size of earth is shown for comparison. sunspots appear darker because they are cooler than their surroundings. the typical temperature at the center of a large sunspot is about 3800 k, whereas the photosphere has a temperature of about 5800 k. (credit: modification of work by nasa/sdo) as we saw, the energy that emerges from the photosphere was originally generated deep inside the sun (more on this in the sun: a nuclear powerhouse). this energy is in the form of photons, which make their way slowly toward the solar surface. outside the sun, we can observe only those photons that are emitted into the solar photosphere, where the density of atoms is sufficiently low and the photons can finally escape from the sun without colliding with another atom or ion.
as an analogy, imagine that you are attending a big campus rally and have found a prime spot near the center of the action. your friend arrives late and calls you on your cell phone to ask you to join her at the edge of the crowd. you decide that friendship is worth more than a prime spot, and so you work your way out through the dense crowd to meet her. you can move only a short distance before bumping into someone, changing direction, and trying again, making your way slowly to the outside edge of the crowd. all this while, your efforts are not visible to your waiting friend at the edge. your friend can’t see you until you get very close to the edge because of all the bodies in the way. so too photons making their way through the sun are constantly bumping into atoms, changing direction, working their way slowly outward, and becoming visible only when they reach the atmosphere of the sun where the density of atoms is too low to block their outward progress.
astronomers have found that the solar atmosphere changes from almost perfectly transparent to almost completely opaque in a distance of just over 400 kilometers; it is this thin region that we call the photosphere, 514 15 • the sun: a garden-variety star access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page532_img1.jpeg] a word that comes from the greek for “light sphere.” when astronomers speak of the “diameter” of the sun, they mean the size of the region surrounded by the photosphere. the photosphere looks sharp only from a distance. if you were falling into the sun, you would not feel any surface but would just sense a gradual increase in the density of the gas surrounding you. it is much the same as falling through a cloud while skydiving. from far away, the cloud looks as if it has a sharp surface, but you do not feel a surface as you fall into it. (one big difference between these two scenarios, however, is temperature. the sun is so hot that you would be vaporized long before you reached the photosphere.
skydiving in earth’s atmosphere is much safer.) we might note that the atmosphere of the sun is not a very dense layer compared to the air in the room where you are reading this text. at a typical point in the photosphere, the pressure is less than 10% of earth’s pressure at sea level, and the density is about one ten-thousandth of earth’s atmospheric density at sea level. observations with telescopes show that the photosphere has a mottled appearance, resembling grains of rice spilled on a dark tablecloth or a pot of boiling oatmeal. this structure of the photosphere is called granulation (see figure 15.6). granules, which are typically 700 to 1000 kilometers in diameter (about the width of texas), appear as bright areas surrounded by narrow, darker (cooler) regions. the lifetime of an individual granule is only 5 to 10 minutes. even larger are supergranules, which are about 35,000 kilometers across (about the size of two earths) and last about 24 hours. figure 15.6 granulation pattern.