only those objects launched with a speed greater than this escape velocity can get away from earth. the escape velocity from the surface of the sun is higher yet—618 kilometers per second. now imagine that we begin to compress the sun, forcing it to shrink in diameter. recall that the pull of gravity depends on both the mass that is pulling you and your distance from the center of gravity of that mass. if the sun is compressed, its mass will remain the same, but the distance between a point on the sun’s surface and the center will get smaller and smaller. thus, as we compress the star, the pull of gravity for an object on the shrinking surface will get stronger and stronger (figure 24.12). explain the event horizon surrounding a black hole discuss why the popular notion of black holes as great sucking monsters that can ingest material at great distances from them is erroneous use the concept of warped spacetime near a black hole to track what happens to any object that might fall into a black hole recognize why the concept of a singularity—with its infinite density and zero volume—presents major challenges to our understanding of matter 24.5 • black holes 839 figure 24.12 formation of a black hole.
at left, an imaginary astronaut floats near the surface of a massive star-core about to collapse. as the same mass falls into a smaller sphere, the gravity at its surface goes up, making it harder for anything to escape from the stellar surface. eventually the mass collapses into so small a sphere that the escape velocity exceeds the speed of light and nothing can get away. note that the size of the astronaut has been exaggerated. in the last picture, the astronaut is just outside the sphere we will call the event horizon and is stretched and squeezed by the strong gravity. when the shrinking sun reaches the diameter of a neutron star (about 20 kilometers), the velocity required to escape its gravitational pull will be about half the speed of light. suppose we continue to compress the sun to a smaller and smaller diameter. (we saw this can’t happen to a star like our sun in the real world because of electron degeneracy, i.e., the mutual repulsion between tightly packed electrons; this is just a quick “thought experiment” to get our bearings). ultimately, as the sun shrinks, the escape velocity near the surface would exceed the speed of light.
if the speed you need to get away is faster than the fastest possible speed in the universe, then nothing, not even light, is able to escape. an object with such large escape velocity emits no light, and anything that falls into it can never return. in modern terminology, we call an object from which light cannot escape a black hole, a name popularized by the america scientist john wheeler starting in the late 1960s (figure 24.13). the idea that such objects might exist is, however, not a new one. cambridge professor and amateur astronomer john michell wrote a paper in 1783 about the possibility that stars with escape velocities exceeding that of light might exist. and in 1796, the french mathematician pierre-simon, marquis de laplace, made similar calculations using newton’s theory of gravity; he called the resulting objects “dark bodies.” 840 24 • black holes and curved spacetime access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page858_img1.jpeg] figure 24.13 john wheeler (1911–2008).
this brilliant physicist did much pioneering work in general relativity theory and popularized the term black hole starting in the late 1960s. (credit: modification of work by roy bishop) while these early calculations provided strong hints that something strange should be expected if very massive objects collapse under their own gravity, we really need general relativity theory to give an adequate description of what happens in such a situation. collapse with relativity general relativity tells us that gravity is really a curvature of spacetime. as gravity increases (as in the collapsing sun of our thought experiment), the curvature gets larger and larger. eventually, if the sun could shrink down to a diameter of about 6 kilometers, only light beams sent out perpendicular to the surface would escape. all others would fall back onto the star (figure 24.14). if the sun could then shrink just a little more, even that one remaining light beam would no longer be able to escape. figure 24.14 light paths near a massive object. suppose a person could stand on the surface of a normal star with a flashlight. the light leaving the flashlight travels in a straight line no matter where the flashlight is pointed. now consider what happens if the star collapses so that it is just a little larger than a black hole.