we can analyze a radial velocity curve (such as the one in figure 18.7) to determine the masses of the stars in a spectroscopic binary. this is complex in practice but not hard in principle. we measure the speeds of the stars from the doppler effect. we then determine the period—how long the stars take to go through an orbital cycle—from the velocity curve. knowing how fast the stars are moving and how long they take to go around tells us the circumference of the orbit and, hence, the separation of the stars in kilometers or astronomical units. from kepler’s law, the period and the separation allow us to calculate the sum of the stars’ masses. of course, knowing the sum of the masses is not as useful as knowing the mass of each star separately. but the relative orbital speeds of the two stars can tell us how much of the total mass each star has. as we saw in 610 18 • the stars: a celestial census access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page628_img1.jpeg] our seesaw analogy, the more massive star is closer to the center of mass and therefore has a smaller orbit.
therefore, it moves more slowly to get around in the same time compared to the more distant, lower-mass star. if we sort out the speeds relative to each other, we can sort out the masses relative to each other. in practice, we also need to know how the binary system is oriented in the sky to our line of sight, but if we do, and the just-described steps are carried out carefully, the result is a calculation of the masses of each of the two stars in the system. to summarize, a good measurement of the motion of two stars around a common center of mass, combined with the laws of gravity, allows us to determine the masses of stars in such systems. these mass measurements are absolutely crucial to developing a theory of how stars evolve. one of the best things about this method is that it is independent of the location of the binary system. it works as well for stars 100 light- years away from us as for those in our immediate neighborhood.
to take a specific example, sirius is one of the few binary stars in appendix j for which we have enough information to apply kepler’s third law: in this case, the two stars, the one we usually call sirius and its very faint companion, are separated by about 20 au and have an orbital period of about 50 years. if we place these values in the formula we would have this can be solved for the sum of the masses: therefore, the sum of masses of the two stars in the sirius binary system is 3.2 times the sun’s mass. in order to determine the individual mass of each star, we would need the velocities of the two stars and the orientation of the orbit relative to our line of sight. this animation (https://openstax.org/l/30binstaranim) lets you follow the orbits of a binary star system in various combinations of the masses of the two stars. you can specify a mass for each star and the orbital characteristics, hit enter, and then see how the orbit changes, and relate that to how the absorption lines’ doppler shifts change over time. the range of stellar masses how large can the mass of a star be? stars more massive than the sun are rare.
none of the stars within 30 light-years of the sun has a mass greater than four times that of the sun. searches at large distances from the sun have led to the discovery of a few stars with masses up to about 100 times that of the sun, and a handful of stars (a few out of several billion) may have masses as large as 250 solar masses. however, most stars have less mass than the sun. link to learning 18.2 • measuring stellar masses 611 according to theoretical calculations, the smallest mass that a true star can have is about 1/12 that of the sun. by a “true” star, astronomers mean one that becomes hot enough to fuse protons to form helium (as discussed in the sun: a nuclear powerhouse). objects with masses between roughly 1/100 and 1/12 that of the sun may produce energy for a brief time by means of nuclear reactions involving deuterium, but they do not become hot enough to fuse protons. such objects are intermediate in mass between stars and planets and have been given the name brown dwarfs (figure 18.8).