by digging into the data with sophisticated computer programs, astronomers have turned up numerous tiny, faint dwarf galaxies that are all but invisible to the eye even in those deep telescopic images. these new findings may help solve a long-standing problem: the prevailing theories of how galaxies form predicted that there should be more dwarf galaxies around big galaxies like the milky way than had been observed—and only now do we have the tools to find these faint and tiny galaxies and begin to compare the numbers of them with theoretical predictions. you can read more about the sloan survey (https://openstax.org/l/30sloansurvey) and its dramatic results. and check out this brief animation (https://openstax.org/l/30anifliarrgal) of a flight through the arrangement of the galaxies as revealed by the survey. several new dwarf galaxies have also been found near the andromeda galaxy. such dwarf galaxies are difficult to find because they typically contain relatively few stars, and it is hard to distinguish them from the foreground stars in our own milky way. figure 28.14 is a rough sketch showing where the brighter members of the local group are located.
the average of the motions of all the galaxies in the local group indicates that its total mass is about 4 × 1012 msun, and at least half of this mass is contained in the two giant spirals—the andromeda galaxy and the milky way galaxy. and bear in mind that a substantial amount of the mass in the local group is in the form of dark matter. link to learning 972 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org figure 28.14 local group. this illustration shows some members of the local group of galaxies, with our milky way at the center. the exploded view at the top shows the region closest to the milky way and fits into the bigger view at the bottom as shown by the dashed lines. the three largest galaxies among the three dozen or so members of the local group are all spirals; the others are small irregular galaxies and dwarf ellipticals. a number of new members of the group have been found since this map was made. neighboring groups and clusters small galaxy groups like ours are hard to notice at larger distances. however, there are much more substantial groups called galaxy clusters that are easier to spot even many millions of light-years away.
such clusters are described as poor or rich depending on how many galaxies they contain. rich clusters have thousands or even tens of thousands of galaxies, although many of the galaxies are quite faint and hard to detect. the nearest moderately rich galaxy cluster is called the virgo cluster, after the constellation in which it is seen. it is about 50 million light-years away and contains thousands of members, of which a few are shown in figure 28.15. the giant elliptical (and very active) galaxy m87, which you came to know and love in the chapter on active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes, belongs to the virgo cluster. 28.3 • the distribution of galaxies in space 973 [image: astronomy_openstax_page991_img1.jpeg] figure 28.15 central region of the virgo cluster. virgo is the nearest rich cluster and is at a distance of about 50 million light- years. it contains hundreds of bright galaxies. in this picture you can see only the central part of the cluster, including the giant elliptical galaxy m87, just below center.
other spirals and ellipticals are visible; the two galaxies to the top right are known as “the eyes.” (credit: modification of work by chris mihos (case western reserve university)/eso) a good example of a cluster that is much larger than the virgo complex is the coma cluster, with a diameter of at least 10 million light-years (figure 28.16). a little over 300 million light-years distant, this cluster is centered on two giant ellipticals whose luminosities equal about 400 billion suns each. thousands of galaxies have been observed in coma, but the galaxies we see are almost certainly only part of what is really there. dwarf galaxies are too faint to be seen at the distance of coma, but we expect they are part of this cluster just as they are part of nearer ones. if so, then coma likely contains tens of thousands of galaxies. the total mass of this cluster is about 4 × 1015 msun (enough mass to make 4 million billion stars like the sun). let’s pause here for a moment of perspective. we are now discussing numbers by which even astronomers sometimes feel overwhelmed.