you could see the spotlight just fine, but what are your chances of catching the mosquito in that light? instead of making direct images, astronomers have relied on indirect observations and have now succeeded in detecting a multitude of planets around other stars. in 1995, after decades of effort, we found the first such exoplanet (a planet outside our solar system) orbiting a main-sequence star, and today we know that most stars form with planets. this is an example of how persistence and new methods of observation advance the knowledge of humanity. by studying exoplanets, astronomers hope to better understand our solar system in context of the rest of the universe. for instance, how does the arrangement of our solar system compare to planetary systems in the rest of the universe? what do exoplanets tell us about the process of planet formation? and how does knowing the frequency of exoplanets influence our estimates of whether there is life elsewhere? searching for orbital motion most exoplanet detections are made using techniques where we observe the effect that the planet exerts on the host star. for example, the gravitational tug of an unseen planet will cause a small wobble in the host star.
or, if its orbit is properly aligned, a planet will periodically cross in front of the star, causing the brightness of the star to dim. to understand how a planet can move its host star, consider a single jupiter-like planet. both the planet and the star actually revolve about their common center of mass. remember that gravity is a mutual attraction. the star and the planet each exert a force on the other, and we can find a stable point, the center of mass, between them about which both objects move. the smaller the mass of a body in such a system, the larger its orbit. a massive star barely swings around the center of mass, while a low-mass planet makes a much larger “tour.” suppose the planet is like jupiter and has a mass about one-thousandth that of its star; in this case, the size of the star’s orbit is one-thousandth the size of the planet’s. to get a sense of how difficult observing such motion might be, let’s see how hard jupiter would be to detect in this way from the distance of a nearby star.
consider an alien astronomer trying to observe our own system from alpha centauri, the closest star system to our own (about 4.25 light-years away). there are two ways this astronomer could try to detect the orbital motion of the sun. one way would be to look for changes in the sun’s position on the sky. the second would be to use the link to learning describe the orbital motion of planets in our solar system using kepler’s laws compare the indirect and direct observational techniques for exoplanet detection 716 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org doppler effect to look for changes in its velocity. let’s discuss each of these in turn. the diameter of jupiter’s apparent orbit viewed from alpha centauri is 10 seconds of arc, and that of the sun’s orbit is 0.010 seconds of arc.
(remember, 1 second of arc is 1/3600 degree.) if they could measure the apparent position of the sun (which is bright and easy to detect) to sufficient precision, they would describe an orbit of diameter 0.010 seconds of arc with a period equal to that of jupiter, which is 12 years. in other words, if they watched the sun for 12 years, they would see it wiggle back and forth in the sky by this minuscule fraction of a degree. from the observed motion and the period of the “wiggle,” they could deduce the mass of jupiter and its distance using kepler’s laws. (to refresh your memory about these laws, see the chapter on orbits and gravity.) measuring positions in the sky this accurately is extremely difficult, and so far, astronomers have not made any confirmed detections of planets using this technique. however, we have been successful in using spectrometers to measure the changing velocity of stars with planets around them. as the star and planet orbit each other, part of their motion will be in our line of sight (toward us or away from us). such motion can be measured using the doppler effect and the star’s spectrum.