thus, it was possible to take as many as 5000 spectra in one night (provided the weather was good making connections 982 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1000_img1.jpeg] enough). the galaxy survey led to a more comprehensive map of the sky than has ever before been possible, allowing astronomers to test their ideas about large-scale structure and the evolution of galaxies against an impressive array of real data. the information recorded by the sloan survey staggers the imagination. the data came in at 8 megabytes per second (this means 8 million individual numbers or characters every second). over the course of the project, scientists recorded over 15 terabytes, or 15 thousand billion bytes, which they estimate is comparable to the information contained in the library of congress. organizing and sorting this volume of data and extracting the useful scientific results it contains is a formidable challenge, even in our information age. like many other fields, astronomy has now entered an era of “big data,” requiring supercomputers and advanced computer algorithms to sift through all those terabytes of data efficiently.
one very successful solution to the challenge of dealing with such large datasets is to turn to “citizen science,” or crowd-sourcing, an approach the sdss helped pioneer. the human eye is very good at recognizing subtle differences among shapes, such as between two different spiral galaxies, while computers often fail at such tasks. when sloan project astronomers wanted to catalog the shapes of some of the millions of galaxies in their new images, they launched the “galaxy zoo” project: volunteers around the world were given a short training course online, then were provided with a few dozen galaxy images to classify by eye. the project was wildly successful, resulting in over 40 million galaxy classifications by more than 100,000 volunteers and the discovery of whole new types of galaxies. learn more about how you can be part of the project of classifying galaxies (https://openstax.org/l/ 30classgalax) in this citizen science effort. this program is part of a whole series of “citizen science” projects (https://openstax.org/l/30citizscien) that enable people in all walks of life to be part of the research that professional astronomers (and scholars in a growing number of fields) need help with.
28.4 the challenge of dark matter learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: so far this chapter has focused almost entirely on matter that radiates electromagnetic energy—stars, planets, gas, and dust. but, as we have pointed out in several earlier chapters (especially the milky way galaxy), it is now clear that galaxies contain large amounts of dark matter as well. there is much more dark matter, in fact, than matter we can see—which means it would be foolish to ignore the effect of this unseen material in our theories about the structure of the universe. (as many a ship captain in the polar seas found out too late, the part of the iceberg visible above the ocean’s surface was not necessarily the only part he needed to pay attention to.) dark matter turns out to be extremely important in determining the evolution of galaxies and of the universe as a whole.
link to learning explain how astronomers know that the solar system contains very little dark matter summarize the evidence for dark matter in most galaxies explain how we know that galaxy clusters are dominated by dark matter relate the presence of dark matter to the average mass-to-light ratio of huge volumes of space containing many galaxies 28.4 • the challenge of dark matter 983 the idea that much of the universe is filled with dark matter may seem like a bizarre concept, but we can cite a historical example of “dark matter” much closer to home. in the mid-nineteenth century, measurements showed that the planet uranus did not follow exactly the orbit predicted from newton’s laws if one added up the gravitational forces of all the known objects in the solar system. some people worried that newton’s laws may simply not work so far out in our solar system. but the more straightforward interpretation was to attribute uranus’ orbital deviations to the gravitational effects of a new planet that had not yet been seen. calculations showed where that planet had to be, and neptune was discovered just about in the predicted location. in the same way, astronomers now routinely determine the location and amount of dark matter in galaxies by measuring its gravitational effects on objects we can see.