also detected in titan’s atmosphere were carbon monoxide (co), hydrocarbons (compounds of hydrogen and carbon) such as methane (ch4), ethane (c2h6), and propane (c3h8), and nitrogen compounds such as explain how the thick atmosphere of titan makes bodies of liquid on its surface possible describe what we learned from the landing on titan with the huygens probe discuss the features we observed on the surface of triton when voyager 2 flew by 404 12 • rings, moons, and pluto access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page422_img1.jpeg] hydrogen cyanide (hcn), cyanogen (c2n2), and cyanoacetylene (hc3n). their presence indicates an active chemistry in which sunlight interacts with atmospheric nitrogen and methane to create a rich mix of organic molecules. there are also multiple layers of hydrocarbon haze and clouds in the atmosphere, as illustrated in figure 12.12. figure 12.12 structure of titan’s atmosphere. some characteristics of titan’s atmosphere resemble those of earth’s atmosphere, although it is much colder than our planet. the red line indicates the temperature of titan’s atmosphere at different altitudes.
these voyager discoveries motivated a much more ambitious exploration program using the nasa cassini saturn orbiter and a probe to land on titan called huygens, built by the european space agency. the orbiter, which included several cameras, spectrometers, and a radar imaging system, made dozens of close flybys of titan between 2004 and 2015, each yielding radar and infrared images of portions of the surface (see exploring the outer planets). the huygens probe successfully descended by parachute through the atmosphere, photographing the surface from below the clouds, and landing on january 14, 2005. this was the first (and so far the only) spacecraft landing on a moon in the outer solar system. at the end of its parachute descent, the 319-kilogram huygens probe safely touched down, slid a short distance, and began sending data back to earth, including photos and analyses of the atmosphere. it appeared to have landed on a flat, boulder-strewn plain, but both the surface and the boulders were composed of water ice, which is as hard as rock at the temperature of titan (see figure 12.13).
the photos taken during descent showed a variety of features, including drainage channels, suggesting that huygens had landed on the shore of an ancient hydrocarbon lake. the sky was deep orange, and the brightness of the sun was a thousand times less than sunlight on earth (but still more than a hundred times brighter than under the full moon on earth). titan’s surface temperature was 94 k (−179 °c). the warmer spacecraft heated enough of the ice where it landed for its instruments to measure released hydrocarbon gas. measurements on the surface continued for more than an hour before the probe succumbed to the frigid temperature. 12.3 • titan and triton 405 [image: astronomy_openstax_page423_img1.jpeg] figure 12.13 views of the surface of titan. the left image shows the views of titan from the descent camera, in a flattened projection, at different altitudes. the right image, taken after landing, shows a boulder-strewn surface illuminated by faint reddish sunlight. the boulders are composed of water ice.
(credit left: modification of work by esa/nasa/jpl/university of arizona; credit right: modification of work by esa/nasa/jpl/university of arizona; processed by andrey pivovarov) radar and infrared imaging of titan from the cassini orbiter gradually built up a picture of a remarkably active surface on this moon, complex and geologically young (figure 12.14). there are large methane lakes near the polar regions that interact with the methane in the atmosphere, much as earth’s water oceans interact with the water vapor in our atmosphere. the presence of many erosional features indicates that atmospheric methane can condense and fall as rain, then flow down valleys to the big lakes. thus, titan has a low- temperature equivalent of the water cycle on earth, with liquid on the surface that evaporates, forms clouds, and then condenses to fall as rain—but on titan the liquid is a combination of methane, ethane, and a trace of other hydrocarbons. it is a weirdly familiar and yet utterly alien landscape. 406 12 • rings, moons, and pluto access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page424_img1.jpeg] figure 12.14 titan’s lakes.