substituting into the equation, we get or 1%, which can easily be detected with the instruments on board the kepler spacecraft. 720 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page738_img1.jpeg] check your learning what is the transit depth for a star half the size of the sun with a much smaller planet, like the size of earth? answer: the radius of earth is 6371 km. therefore, , or significantly less than 1%. the doppler method allows us to estimate the mass of a planet. if the same object can be studied by both the doppler and transit techniques, we can measure both the mass and the size of the exoplanet. this is a powerful combination that can be used to derive the average density (mass/volume) of the planet. in 1999, using measurements from ground-based telescopes, the first transiting planet was detected orbiting the star hd 209458. the planet transits its parent star for about 3 hours every 3.5 days as we view it from earth.
doppler measurements showed that the planet around hd 209458 has about 70% the mass of jupiter, but its radius is about 35% larger than jupiter’s. this was the first case where we could determine what an exoplanet was made of—with that mass and radius, hd 209458 must be a gas and liquid world like jupiter or saturn. it is even possible to learn something about the planet’s atmosphere. when the planet passes in front of hd 209458, the atoms in the planet’s atmosphere absorb starlight. observations of this absorption were first made at the wavelengths of yellow sodium lines and showed that the atmosphere of the planet contains sodium; now, other elements can be measured as well. try a transit simulator (https://openstax.org/l/30transimul) that demonstrates how a planet passing in front of its parent star can lead to the planet’s detection. follow the instructions to run the animation on your computer. transiting planets reveal such a wealth of information that the french space agency (cnes) and the european space agency (esa) launched the corot space telescope in 2007 to detect transiting exoplanets.
corot discovered 32 transiting exoplanets, including the first transiting planet with a size and density similar to earth. in 2012, the spacecraft suffered an onboard computer failure, ending the mission. meanwhile, nasa built a much more powerful transit observatory called kepler. in 2009, nasa launched the kepler space telescope, dedicated to the discovery of transiting exoplanets. this spacecraft stared continuously at more than 150,000 stars in a small patch of sky near the constellation of cygnus—just above the plane of our milky way galaxy (figure 21.20). kepler’s cameras and ability to measure small changes in brightness very precisely enabled the discovery of thousands of exoplanets, including many multi-planet systems. the spacecraft required three reaction wheels—a type of wheel used to help control slight rotation of the spacecraft—to stabilize the pointing of the telescope and monitor the brightness of the same group of stars over and over again. kepler was launched with four reaction wheels (one a spare), but by may 2013, two wheels had failed and the telescope could no longer be accurately pointed toward the target area.
kepler had been designed to operate for 4 years, and ironically, the pointing failure occurred exactly 4 years and 1 day after it began observing. however, this failure did not end the mission. the kepler telescope continued to observe for two more years, looking for short-period transits in different parts of the sky. we discuss the kepler results in the next section exoplanets everywhere: what we are learning. a new nasa mission called tess (transiting exoplanet survey link to learning 21.4 • planets beyond the solar system: search and discovery 721 satellite) is now carrying out a transit survey of the nearer (and therefore brighter) stars all over the sky. as of the end of 2024, the tess mission has reported almost 600 planet discoveries and about 7400 planet candidates that need further observations to confirm. figure 21.20 kepler’s field of view. the boxes show the region where the kepler spacecraft cameras took images of over 150,000 stars regularly, to find transiting planets.