so, using the relativistic doppler equation, we compute the true recession rate as therefore, the actual recession speed is only 18% of the speed of light. while this may not initially seem like a big difference from the classical measurement, there is already an 11% deviation between the classical and the relativistic solutions; and at greater recession speeds, the divergence between the classical and relativistic speeds increases rapidly! quasars obey the hubble law the first question astronomers asked was whether quasars obeyed the hubble law and were really at the large distances implied by their redshifts. if they did not obey the rule that large redshift means large distance, then they could be much closer, and their luminosity could be a lot less. one straightforward way to show that quasars had to obey the hubble law was to demonstrate that they were actually part of galaxies, and that their redshift was the same as the galaxy that hosted them. since ordinary galaxies do obey the hubble law, anything within them would be subject to the same rules. observations with the hubble space telescope provided the strongest evidence showing that quasars are located at the centers of galaxies.
hints that this is true had been obtained with ground-based telescopes, but space observations were required to make a convincing case. the reason is that quasars can outshine their entire galaxies by factors of 10 to 100 or even more. when this light passes through earth’s atmosphere, it is 27.1 • quasars 931 blurred by turbulence and drowns out the faint light from the surrounding galaxy—much as the bright headlights from an oncoming car at night make it difficult to see anything close by. the hubble space telescope, however, is not affected by atmospheric turbulence and can detect the faint glow from some of the galaxies that host quasars (figure 27.5). quasars have been found in the cores of both spiral and elliptical galaxies, and each quasar has the same redshift as its host galaxy. a wide range of studies with the hubble space telescope now clearly demonstrate that quasars are indeed far away. if so, they must be producing a truly impressive amount of energy to be detectable as points of light that are much brighter than their galaxy.
interestingly, many quasar host galaxies are found to be involved in a collision with a second galaxy, providing, as we shall see, an important clue to the source of their prodigious energy output. figure 27.5 quasar host galaxies. the hubble space telescope reveals the much fainter “host” galaxies around quasars. the top left image shows a quasar that lies at the heart of a spiral galaxy 1.4 billion light-years from earth. the bottom left image shows a quasar that lies at the center of an elliptical galaxy some 1.5 billion light-years from us. the middle images show remote pairs of interacting galaxies, one of which harbors a quasar. each of the right images shows long tails of gas and dust streaming away from a galaxy that contains a quasar. such tails are produced when one galaxy collides with another. (credit: modification of work by john bahcall, mike disney, nasa) the size of the energy source given their large distances, quasars have to be extremely luminous to be visible to us at all—far brighter than any normal galaxy. in visible light alone, most are far more energetic than the brightest elliptical galaxies.
but, as we saw, quasars also emit energy at x-ray and ultraviolet wavelengths, and some are radio sources as well. when all their radiation is added together, some qsos have total luminosities as large as a hundred trillion suns (1014 lsun), which is 10 to 100 times the brightness of luminous elliptical galaxies. finding a mechanism to produce the large amount of energy emitted by a quasar would be difficult under any circumstances. but there is an additional problem. when astronomers began monitoring quasars carefully, they found that some vary in luminosity on time scales of months, weeks, or even, in some cases, days. this variation is irregular and can change the brightness of a quasar by a few tens of percent in both its visible light and radio output. think about what such a change in luminosity means. a quasar at its dimmest is still more brilliant than any 932 27 • active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page950_img1.jpeg] normal galaxy. now imagine that the brightness increases by 30% in a few weeks.