by the early 18th century ce most natural philosophers had accepted that kepler’s system was correct, but there were still significant holdouts supporting tycho’s geo-heliocentrism who believed that since stellar parallax still had not been observed, heliocentrism was not fact, just a theory. an english theologian and amateur astronomer named james bradley (1693-1762), decided to take up the challenge of observing stellar parallax. his method was drawn from a suggestion first made by galileo, and first attempted by english natural philosopher, robert hooke, in 1674. in the diagram, a telescope is mounted vertically, and secured so that it cannot move, stability being the chief advantage of this setup. this limits the observer to stars that can be seen at the zenith, but any reasonably bright star would serve. the idea was to make very accurate measurements of a selected star, and, over time, it was hoped that slight differences in position would be found as the earth moved in its orbit.
unfortunately for hooke, his attempt was made in a rented london apartment (note the hole he cut in one of the floors so he could observe from the floor below, and the hole in the roof), and the landlord took a very dim view of hooke’s alterations. the attempt was abandoned, mainly because the building shook any time horse-drawn wagons went past his “observatory.” james bradley adopted a similar set-up in 1725. with samuel molyneux, a wealthy amateur who purchased a purpose-built telescope and contributed his mansion in kew green, outside london, bradley established his version of a zenith observatory. at the latitude of london, the star gamma draconis passes directly overhead, and bradley chose it as the target for stellar parallax. after working through various problems with mounting the scope (he strapped it to a chimney), keeping it vertical (using a plumb bob), and other issues, bradley was able to get precision measurements good to 1 arc-second. he calculated that if stellar parallax was detectable with his setup, it would reach its extremes in december and june, and appear as a slight annual “wobble” in the position of gamma draconis.
after the unexpected death of molyneux, bradley continued observations with a second purpose-built telescope mounted in a cottage owned by his aunt. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page449_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 450 figure 492: stellar aberration drawing by blankaxolotl figure 493: effect of earth's velocity drawing by blankaxolotl observations that molyneux and bradley made were added to by bradley alone well into 1728. he detected a wobble, but it was much too large and occurred at the wrong time, maximizing in march and september instead of what he had predicted. in the diagram you can see that in march and september the incident rays from a star swing through the largest angle for an observer on earth’s northern latitudes. it wasn’t until late in 1728 the bradley understood what was happening. the effect discovered and explained by james bradley is called stellar aberration.
an analogy helps to visualize it: suppose you are walking in the rain with an umbrella, where the rain is falling straight down; but in order to protect your legs from getting soaked, you have to tilt the umbrella forward a bit to intercept the raindrops in flight. this is true no matter what direction you walk; you always tilt the umbrella in the direction of your motion. stellar aberration works the same way, where starlight stands for the rain, the moving earth stands for the walker, and a zenith telescope stands for the umbrella. bradley realized from ole roemer that the speed of light is finite, and therefore takes a finite time from the moment light enters the telescope until it is observed at the eyepiece. bradley was actually measuring the angle the telescope had to be tilted to intercept the falling starlight, which would only be necessary if the earth was moving. stellar aberration was thus observable proof that the earth does move in an orbit around the sun. in ensuing years bradley would find another subtle wobble, called nutation. the earth is a sphere, but not a perfect one.