all rights reserved. no part of these materials may be reproduced or distributed without the prior written permission of the author. this work is included here with permission by the author. ancient astronomy undoubtedly, pre-historic humans studied the night sky. large stone structures oriented to various points in the sky litter the landscape on most of the world’s continents. but it is not until historic eras, that is, since the invention of written records, that we can be certain what the ancients thought was important, and in some cases, why they recorded their observations. the earliest of these records trace back to the ancient near east, to that region of modern-day iraq we now refer to as babylon. the priestly caste of the babylonians, the chaldeans, began to produce astronomical records on clay tablets dating back to about 1800 bce. the observations at that time were mainly about the sun, moon, and venus. later, they included all of the other planets as well. the babylonian achievement lies in the fact that they were eventually able to create mathematical algorithms for each of these objects, making predictions of their motions possible. this was the first time in recorded history that mathematics was combined with observations to make predictions that were reasonably accurate.
over the centuries they continued to refine their predictions by continued observation, which was a chief function of the chaldeans in babylonian society. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page418_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 419 from other clay tablets, archeologists have been able to determine that the reasons for this long-term institutional commitment to astronomy were primarily religious. out of all the objects visible in the night sky, just seven change their positions relative to all the other “fixed” stars. this fact was determined by the babylonians (and other world civilizations) to have meaning, especially as these changing motions were regular enough to be predictable. for the babylonians, this regularity seemed to mean that the gods were communicating with them (or at least to the chaldean priests). this attempt to attach meanings to the motions of the planets became the basis for astrology. from the standpoint of the significance for modern astronomy, we should note that the babylonian achievement was limited to algorithms. that is, they had no theory of planetary movement; rather, they were able to create step-by-step procedures to achieve their purposes.
they created no models of the heavens, though they did do some mapping of the skies. much the same can be said for the egyptians, who oriented some of their pyramids and temple complexes to various celestial objects. but again, they did not create astronomical models, and their interest in the heavens dealt mainly with navigating the soul through the afterlife. the ancient greeks it isn’t until we come to the ancient greeks, about 600bce, that we find a significant new development in how to approach the study of nature. for the first time in the written record, we find speculations about the functioning of nature that “left the gods out.” this is now referred to as the beginning of philosophy. this is not to say that greek civilization did not have religion – far from it! but a handful of philosophers created, and kept alive through each new generation, an approach to nature that we recognize today as the beginnings of science. and astronomy was the key to that new tradition. there are several philosophical traditions, or schools, that we could discuss, but we will limit ourselves to those that relate most directly to the development of astronomy. the first is pythagoras of samos, who flourished about 530 bce.
after travelling throughout the mediterranean and the near east, pythagoras settled in southern italy, where he founded a community of scholars. the pythagorean school existed for several decades, and was committed to the study of number as the underlying reality of the cosmos. we are all familiar with the pythagorean theorem for right triangles, and they went on to develop the idea of mathematical proofs for their propositions. the pythagoreans were the first to sketch out geocentric models of the heavens. one cosmology, attributed to philolaus of croton (5th century bce), placed at the center of the universe a “central fire” (hestia), with both the sun and the earth in orbit around it. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 420 figure 456: the pythagorean system another system, proposed by a pythagorean named heraclides of pontus (4th century bce), placed the earth at the center, with the other planets in orbit around the earth, except for mercury and venus, which revolved around the sun.