we have seen that the apparent rotation of the celestial sphere could be accounted for either by a daily rotation of the sky around a stationary earth or by the rotation of earth itself. since the seventeenth century, it has been generally accepted that it is earth that turns, but not until the nineteenth century did the french physicist jean foucault provide an unambiguous demonstration of this rotation. in 1851, he suspended a 60-meter pendulum with a mass of about 25 kilograms from the dome of the pantheon in paris and started the pendulum swinging evenly. if earth had not been turning, there would have been no alteration of the pendulum’s plane of oscillation, and so it would have continued tracing the same path. yet after a few minutes foucault could see that the pendulum’s plane of motion was turning. foucault explained that it was not the pendulum that was shifting, but rather earth that was turning beneath it (figure 4.4). you can now find such pendulums in many science centers and planetariums around the world. 104 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org figure 4.4 foucault’s pendulum.
as earth turns, the plane of oscillation of the foucault pendulum shifts gradually so that as time passes, more and more of the targets in the circle at the edge of the wooden platform are knocked over in sequence. (credit: manuel m. vicente) can you think of other pieces of evidence that indicate that it is earth and not the sky that is turning? (see collaborative group activity a at the end of this chapter.) 4.2 the seasons learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: one of the fundamental facts of life at earth’s midlatitudes, where most of this book’s readers live, is that there are significant variations in the heat we receive from the sun during the course of the year. we thus divide the year into seasons, each with its different amount of sunlight. the difference between seasons gets more pronounced the farther north or south from the equator we travel, and the seasons in the southern hemisphere are the opposite of what we find on the northern half of earth. with these observed facts in mind, let us ask what causes the seasons. many people have believed that the seasons were the result of the changing distance between earth and the sun.
this sounds reasonable at first: it should be colder when earth is farther from the sun. but the facts don’t bear out this hypothesis. although earth’s orbit around the sun is an ellipse, its distance from the sun varies by only about 3%. that’s not enough to cause significant variations in the sun’s heating. to make matters worse for people in north america who hold this hypothesis, earth is actually closest to the sun in january, when the northern hemisphere is in the middle of winter. and if distance were the governing factor, why would the two hemispheres have opposite seasons? as we shall show, the seasons are actually caused by the 23.5° tilt of earth’s axis. the seasons and sunshine figure 4.5 shows earth’s annual path around the sun, with earth’s axis tilted by 23.5°. note that our axis continues to point the same direction in the sky throughout the year. as earth travels around the sun, in june the northern hemisphere “leans into” the sun and is more directly illuminated. in december, the situation is reversed: the southern hemisphere leans into the sun, and the northern hemisphere leans away.
in describe how the tilt of earth’s axis causes the seasons explain how seasonal differences on earth vary with latitude 4.2 • the seasons 105 [image: astronomy_openstax_page123_img1.jpeg] september and march, earth leans “sideways”—neither into the sun nor away from it—so the two hemispheres are equally favored with sunshine. figure 4.5 seasons. we see earth at different seasons as it circles the sun. in june, the northern hemisphere “leans into” the sun, and those in the north experience summer and have longer days. in december, during winter in the northern hemisphere, the southern hemisphere “leans into” the sun and is illuminated more directly. in spring and autumn, the two hemispheres receive more equal shares of sunlight.1 how does the sun’s favoring one hemisphere translate into making it warmer for us down on the surface of earth? there are two effects we need to consider. when we lean into the sun, sunlight hits us at a more direct angle and is more effective at heating earth’s surface (figure 4.6). you can get a similar effect by shining a flashlight onto a wall.