on this basis, he called the bright blue distinguish between population i and population ii stars according to their locations, motions, heavy-element abundances, and ages explain why the oldest stars in the galaxy are poor in elements heavier than hydrogen and helium, while stars like the sun and even younger stars are typically richer in these heavy elements 25.5 • stellar populations in the galaxy 883 [image: astronomy_openstax_page901_img1.jpeg] stars in the spiral arms population i and all the stars in the halo and globular clusters population ii. figure 25.20 andromeda galaxy (m31). this neighboring spiral looks similar to our own galaxy in that it is a disk galaxy with a central bulge. note the bulge of older, yellowish stars in the center, the bluer and younger stars in the outer regions, and the dust in the disk that blocks some of the light from the bulge. (credit: adam evans) we now know that the populations differ not only in their locations in the galaxy, but also in their chemical composition, age, and orbital motions around the center of the galaxy. population i stars are found only in the disk and follow nearly circular orbits around the galactic center.
examples are bright supergiant stars, main- sequence stars of high luminosity (spectral classes o and b), which are concentrated in the spiral arms, and members of young open star clusters. interstellar matter and molecular clouds are found in the same places as population i stars. population ii stars show no correlation with the location of the spiral arms. these objects are found throughout the galaxy. some are in the disk, but many others follow eccentric elliptical orbits that carry them high above the galactic disk into the halo. examples include stars surrounded by planetary nebulae and rr lyrae variable stars. the stars in globular clusters, found almost entirely in the galaxy’s halo, are also classified as population ii. today, we know much more about stellar evolution than astronomers did in the 1940s, and we can determine the ages of stars. population i includes stars with a wide range of ages. while some are as old as 10 billion years, others are still forming today. for example, the sun, which is about 5 billion years old, is a population i star. but so are the massive young stars in the orion nebula that have formed in the last few million years.
population ii, on the other hand, consists entirely of old stars that formed very early in the history of the galaxy; typical ages are 11 to 13 billion years. we also now have good determinations of the compositions of stars. these are based on analyses of the stars’ detailed spectra. nearly all stars appear to be composed mostly of hydrogen and helium, but their abundances of the heavier elements differ. in the sun and other population i stars, the heavy elements (those heavier than hydrogen and helium) account for 1–4% of the total stellar mass. population ii stars in the outer galactic halo and in globular clusters have much lower abundances of the heavy elements—often less than one-hundredth the concentrations found in the sun and in rare cases even lower. the oldest population ii star discovered to date has less than one ten-millionth as much iron as the sun, for example. as we discussed in earlier chapters, heavy elements are created deep within the interiors of stars.
they are added to the galaxy’s reserves of raw material when stars die, and their material is recycled into new 884 25 • the milky way galaxy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page902_img1.jpeg] generations of stars. thus, as time goes on, stars are born with larger and larger supplies of heavy elements. population ii stars formed when the abundance of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium was low. population i stars formed later, after mass lost by dying members of the first generations of stars had seeded the interstellar medium with elements heavier than hydrogen and helium. some are still forming now, when further generations have added to the supply of heavier elements available to new stars. the real world with rare exceptions, we should never trust any theory that divides the world into just two categories. while they can provide a starting point for hypotheses and experiments, they are often oversimplifications that need refinement a research continue. the idea of two populations helped organize our initial thoughts about the galaxy, but we now know it cannot explain everything we observe.