this chapter and the next (on the birth of stars) include some of the most beautiful images of nebulae that glow with the light produced when starlight interacts with gas and dust. have your group select one to four of your favorite such nebulae and prepare a report on them to share with the rest of the class. (include such things as their location, distance, size, way they are glowing, and what is happening within 20 • collaborative group activities 695 them.) exercises review questions 1. identify several dark nebulae in photographs in this chapter. give the figure numbers of the photographs, and specify where the dark nebulae are to be found on them. 2. why do nebulae near hot stars look red? why do dust clouds near stars usually look blue? 3. describe the characteristics of the various kinds of interstellar gas (hii regions, neutral hydrogen clouds, ultra-hot gas clouds, and molecular clouds). 4. prepare a table listing the different ways in which dust and gas can be detected in interstellar space. 5. describe how the 21-cm line of hydrogen is formed. why is this line such an important tool for understanding the interstellar medium? 6.
describe the properties of the dust grains found in the space between stars. 7. why is it difficult to determine where cosmic rays come from? 8. what causes reddening of starlight? explain how the reddish color of the sun’s disk at sunset is caused by the same process. 9. why do molecules, including h2 and more complex organic molecules, only form inside dark clouds? why don’t they fill all interstellar space? 10. why can’t we use visible light telescopes to study molecular clouds where stars and planets form? why do infrared or radio telescopes work better? 11. the mass of the interstellar medium is determined by a balance between sources (which add mass) and sinks (which remove it). make a table listing the major sources and sinks, and briefly explain each one. 12. where does interstellar dust come from? how does it form? thought questions 13. figure 20.2 shows a reddish glow around the star antares, and yet the caption says that is a dust cloud. what observations would you make to determine whether the red glow is actually produced by dust or whether it is produced by an h ii region? 14.
if the red glow around antares is indeed produced by reflection of the light from antares by dust, what does its red appearance tell you about the likely temperature of antares? look up the spectral type of antares in appendix j. was your estimate of the temperature about right? in most of the images in this chapter, a red glow is associated with ionized hydrogen. would you expect to find an h ii region around antares? explain your answer. 15. even though neutral hydrogen is the most abundant element in interstellar matter, it was detected first with a radio telescope, not a visible light telescope. explain why. (the explanation given in analyzing starlight for the fact that hydrogen lines are not strong in stars of all temperatures may be helpful.) 16. the terms h ii and h2 are both pronounced “h two.” what is the difference in meaning of those two terms? can there be such a thing as h iii? 17. suppose someone told you that she had discovered h ii around the star aldebaran. would you believe her? why or why not? 18. describe the spectrum of each of the following: 696 20 • exercises access for free at openstax.org a.
starlight reflected by dust, b. a star behind invisible interstellar gas, and c. an emission nebula. 19. according to the text, a star must be hotter than about 25,000 k to produce an h ii region. both the hottest white dwarfs and main-sequence o stars have temperatures hotter than 25,000 k. which type of star can ionize more hydrogen? why? 20. from the comments in the text about which kinds of stars produce emission nebulae and which kinds are associated with reflection nebulae, what can you say about the temperatures of the stars that produce ngc 1999 (figure 20.13)? 21. one way to calculate the size and shape of the galaxy is to estimate the distances to faint stars just from their observed apparent brightnesses and to note the distance at which stars are no longer observable. the first astronomers to try this experiment did not know that starlight is dimmed by interstellar dust. their estimates of the size of the galaxy were much too small. explain why. 22. new stars form in regions where the density of gas and dust is relatively high. suppose you wanted to search for some recently formed stars.