the presence of the dust shields the molecules inside the clouds from ultraviolet radiation and cosmic rays that would break them up. when stars finally begin to form within the cloud, they heat the grains and evaporate the ices. the gravitational attraction of the newly forming stars also increases the density of the surrounding cloud material. many more chemical reactions take place on the surfaces of grains in the gas surrounding the newly forming stars, and these areas are where organic molecules are formed. these molecules can be incorporated into newly formed planetary systems, and the early earth may have been seeded in just such a way. indeed, scientists speculate that some of the water on earth may have come from interstellar grains. recent observations from space have shown that water is abundant in dense interstellar clouds. since stars are formed from this material, water must be present when solar systems, including our own, come into existence. the water in our oceans and lakes may have come initially from water locked into the rocky material that accreted to form earth. alternatively, the water may have been brought to earth when asteroids and comets (formed from the same cloud that made the planets) later impacted it.
scientists estimate that one comet impact every thousand years during earth’s first billion years would have been enough to account for the water we see today. of course, both sources may have contributed to the water we now enjoy drinking and swimming in. any interstellar grains that are incorporated into newly forming stars (instead of the colder planets and smaller bodies around them) will be destroyed by their high temperatures. but eventually, each new 20.5 • the life cycle of cosmic material 689 generation of stars will evolve to become red giants, with stellar winds of their own. some of these stars will also become supernovae and explode. thus, the process of recycling cosmic material can start all over again. 20.6 interstellar matter around the sun learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: we want to conclude our discussion of interstellar matter by asking how this material is organized in our immediate neighborhood. as we discussed above, orbiting x-ray observatories have shown that the galaxy is full of bubbles of hot, x-ray-emitting gas. they also revealed a diffuse background of x-rays that appears to fill the entire sky from our perspective (figure 20.19).
while some of this emission comes from the interaction of the solar wind with the interstellar medium, a majority of it comes from beyond the solar system. the natural explanation for why there is x-ray-emitting gas all around us is that the sun is itself inside one of the bubbles. we therefore call our “neighborhood” the local hot bubble, or local bubble for short. the local bubble is much less dense—an average of approximately 0.01 atoms per cm3—than the average interstellar density of about 1 atom per cm3. this local gas has a temperature of about a million degrees, just like the gas in the other superbubbles that spread throughout our galaxy, but because there is so little hot material, this high temperature does not affect the stars or planets in the area in any way. what caused the local bubble to form? scientists are not entirely sure, but the leading candidate is winds from stars and supernova explosions. in a nearby region in the direction of the constellations scorpius and centaurus, a lot of star formation took place about 15 million years ago. the most massive of these stars evolved very quickly until they produced strong winds, and some ended their lives by exploding.
these processes filled the region around the sun with hot gas, driving away cooler, denser gas. the rim of this expanding superbubble reached the sun about 7.6 million years ago and now lies more than 200 light-years past the sun in the general direction of the constellations of orion, perseus, and auriga. figure 20.19 sky in x-rays. this image, made by the rosat satellite, shows the whole sky in x-rays as seen from earth. different colors indicate different x-ray energies: red is 0.25 kiloelectron volts, green is 0.75 kiloelectron volts, and blue is 1.5 kiloelectron volts. the image is oriented so the plane of the galaxy runs across the middle of the image. the ubiquitous red color, which does not disappear completely even in the galactic plane, is evidence for a source of x-rays all around the sun. (credit: modification of work by nasa) a few clouds of interstellar matter do exist within the local bubble. the sun itself seems to have entered a cloud about 10,000 years ago.