the exact composition of the cores of stars in this mass range is very difficult to determine because of the complex physical characteristics in the cores, particularly at the very high densities and temperatures involved.) we will focus on the more massive iron cores in our discussion. while no energy is being generated within the white dwarf core of the star, fusion still occurs in the shells that surround the core. as the shells finish their fusion reactions and stop producing energy, the ashes of the last reaction fall onto the white dwarf core, increasing its mass. as figure 23.2 shows, a higher mass means a smaller core. the core can contract because even a degenerate gas is still mostly empty space. electrons and atomic nuclei are, after all, extremely small. the electrons and nuclei in a stellar core may be crowded compared to the air in your room, but there is still lots of space between them. the electrons at first resist being crowded closer together, and so the core shrinks only a small amount. ultimately, however, the iron core reaches a mass so large that even degenerate electrons can no longer support it.
when the density reaches 4 × 1011 g/cm3 (400 billion times the density of water), some electrons are actually squeezed into the atomic nuclei, where they combine with protons to form neutrons and neutrinos. this transformation is not something that is familiar from everyday life, but becomes very important as such a massive star core collapses. some of the electrons are now gone, so the core can no longer resist the crushing mass of the star’s overlying layers. the core begins to shrink rapidly. more and more electrons are now pushed into the atomic nuclei, which ultimately become so saturated with neutrons that they cannot hold onto them. at this point, the neutrons are squeezed out of the nuclei and can exert a new force. as is true for electrons, it turns out that the neutrons strongly resist being in the same place and moving in the same way. the force that can be exerted by such degenerate neutrons is much greater than that produced by degenerate electrons, so unless the core is too massive, they can ultimately stop the collapse. this means the collapsing core can reach a stable state as a crushed ball made mainly of neutrons, which astronomers call a neutron star.
we don’t have an exact number (a “chandrasekhar limit”) for the maximum mass of a neutron star, but calculations tell us that the upper mass limit of a body made of neutrons might only be about 3 msun. so if the mass of the core were greater than this, then even neutron degeneracy would not be able to stop the core from collapsing further. the dying star must end up as something even more extremely compressed, which until recently was believed to be only one possible type of object—the state of ultimate compaction known as a black hole (which is the subject of our next chapter). this is because no force was believed to exist that could stop a collapse beyond the neutron star stage. collapse and explosion when the collapse of a high-mass star’s core is stopped by degenerate neutrons, the core is saved from further destruction, but it turns out that the rest of the star is literally blown apart. here’s how it happens. the collapse that takes place when electrons are absorbed into the nuclei is very rapid. in less than a second, a core with a mass of about 1 msun, which originally was approximately the size of earth, collapses to a diameter of less than 20 kilometers.
the speed with which material falls inward reaches one-fourth the speed of light. the collapse halts only when the density of the core exceeds the density of an atomic nucleus (which is the densest form of matter we know). a typical neutron star is so compressed that to duplicate its density, we would have to squeeze all the people in the world into a single sugar cube! this would give us one sugar cube’s worth (one cubic centimeter’s worth) of a neutron star. the neutron degenerate core strongly resists further compression, abruptly halting the collapse. the shock of the sudden jolt initiates a shock wave that starts to propagate outward. however, this shock alone is not enough to create a star explosion. the energy produced by the outflowing matter is quickly absorbed by atomic nuclei in the dense, overlying layers of gas, where it breaks up the nuclei into individual neutrons and 23.2 • evolution of massive stars: an explosive finish 785 protons. our understanding of nuclear processes indicates (as we mentioned above) that each time an electron and a proton in the star’s core merge to make a neutron, the merger releases a neutrino.