a dobsonian telescope is a telescope designed to sit on a flat surface. it can be pointed up and down (altitude) and can be rotated (azimuth). this design was invented by john dobson in the 1950s (see figure 89). these telescopes are a simple design with a simple mount, and are a very cost effective way to make a telescope. these telescopes are responsible for bringing large aperture telescopes into the hands of the the general population. dobsonian telescopes are always alt/az mounted. parts of a typical telescope a refracting telescope has far fewer parts than a reflecting telescope.
figure 89: dobsonian telescope photo by jamesstewart669 figure 90: parts of a refracting telescope figure 91: parts of a newtonian telescope [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page77_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page77_img2.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page77_img3.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 78 figure 92: a ccd chip photo by serych component 21 – recording what we see when we view objects with our eyes, we may marvel at the detail, we may be in awe of their beauty, but they are fleeting glimpses and are soon gone. to continue studying the objects, and to be able to review them at our leisure, we often want some way to record what we see. in the early days, this was done on glass plates or with film cameras. today there are better tools to capture those images. the ccd the ccd chip (charge-coupled device) is an electronics chip that senses photons and converts them into electricity. the chip may contain thousands or millions of cells, called pixels. as the influx of photons increases, the charge increases proportionately.
as the number of pixels increases, the resolution of the image also increases. ccd chips in astronomy cameras often are black and white, not color. this means that every pixel is used to capture a piece of the image. color cameras use neighboring pixels for different colors, so the resolution is reduced. to get a final color image, pictures are taken through color filters. each color filter sees only that specific color of light. when the pictures are combined (stacked) on a computer, the result is a color image. the most common set of color filters are red, green, and blue. ccd filters. standard filters used to generate color images are red, green, and blue. images are taken with no filter and also with each of the color filters. these images are then combined (stacked) using computer software to create a full-color image. figure 93: ccd chip color mask drawing by lozere [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page78_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page78_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 79 using the ccd data spectroscopy.
if the light from the celestial object is sent through a spectroscope, it will be broken down into its individual components. this can then be recorded by the ccd and the spectrum can be analyzed on the computer. photometry. photometry is the study of brightness of the light from an object. ccd detectors, unlike film cameras record light coming in linearly. this means that if you collect an amount of light from a star (x) over a time (t), then if you have an object twice as bright it will collect two times the amount of light (2x) in the same amount of time. or, the same object recorded for twice as long will also capture twice the amount of light (2x). this analysis is most often done using a computer to analyze the pixels in the image. astrometry. another activity that uses ccd images is astrometry. with the accuracy of ccd detectors it is possible to use the computer to calculate the precise location of an object relative to known objects in the image. this is valuable for tracking the movement of asteroids and comets.