since the oldest stars in the disk are nearly as old as the youngest stars in the halo, the collapse must have been rapid (astronomically speaking), requiring perhaps no more than a few hundred million years. collision victims and the multiple merger model in past decades, astronomers have learned that the evolution of the galaxy has not been quite as peaceful as this monolithic collapse model suggests. in 1994, astronomers discovered a small new galaxy in the direction 886 25 • the milky way galaxy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page904_img1.jpeg] of the constellation of sagittarius. the sagittarius dwarf galaxy is currently about 70,000 light-years away from earth and 50,000 light-years from the center of the galaxy. it is the closest galaxy known (figure 25.22). it is very elongated, and its shape indicates that it is being torn apart by our galaxy’s gravitational tides—just as comet shoemaker-levy 9 was torn apart when it passed too close to jupiter in 1992. the sagittarius galaxy is much smaller than the milky way and is about 10,000 times less massive than our galaxy.
all of the stars in the sagittarius dwarf galaxy seem destined to end up in the bulge and halo of the milky way. but don’t sound the funeral bells for the little galaxy quite yet; the ingestion of the sagittarius dwarf will take another 100 million years or so, and the stars themselves will survive. figure 25.22 sagittarius dwarf. in 1994, british astronomers discovered a galaxy in the constellation of sagittarius, located only about 50,000 light-years from the center of the milky way and falling into our galaxy. this image covers a region approximately 70° × 50° and combines a black-and-white view of the disk of our galaxy with a red contour map showing the brightness of the dwarf galaxy. the dwarf galaxy lies on the other side of the galactic center from us. the white stars in the red region mark the locations of several globular clusters contained within the sagittarius dwarf galaxy. the cross marks the galactic center. the horizontal line corresponds to the galactic plane. the blue outline on either side of the galactic plane corresponds to the infrared image in figure 25.7. the boxes mark regions where detailed studies of individual stars led to the discovery of this galaxy.
(credit: modification of work by r. ibata (ubc), r. wyse (jhu), r. sword (ioa)) since that discovery, evidence has been found for many more close encounters between our galaxy and other neighbor galaxies. when a small galaxy ventures too close, the force of gravity exerted by our galaxy tugs harder on the near side than on the far side. the net effect is that the stars that originally belonged to the small galaxy are spread out into a long stream that orbits through the halo of the milky way (figure 25.23). 25.6 • the formation of the galaxy 887 [image: astronomy_openstax_page905_img1.jpeg] figure 25.23 streams in the galactic halo. when a small galaxy is swallowed by the milky way, its member stars are stripped away and form streams of stars in the galactic halo. this image is based on calculations of what some of these tidal streams might look like if the milky way swallowed 50 dwarf galaxies over the past 10 billion years. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/r. hurt (ssc/caltech)) such a tidal stream can maintain its identity for billions of years.
to date, astronomers have now identified streams originating from 12 small galaxies that ventured too close to the much larger milky way. six more streams are associated with globular clusters. it has been suggested that large globular clusters, like omega centauri, are actually dense nuclei of cannibalized dwarf galaxies. the globular cluster m54 is now thought to be the nucleus of the sagittarius dwarf we discussed earlier, which is currently merging with the milky way (figure 25.24). the stars in the outer regions of such galaxies are stripped off by the gravitational pull of the milky way, but the central dense regions may survive. 888 25 • the milky way galaxy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page906_img1.jpeg] figure 25.24 globular cluster m54. this beautiful hubble space telescope image shows the globular cluster that is now believed to be the nucleus of the sagittarius dwarf galaxy. (credit: esa/hubble & nasa) calculations indicate that the galaxy’s thick disk may be a product of one or more such collisions with other galaxies.