two telescopes separated by 1 kilometer provide the same resolution as would a single dish 1 kilometer across (although they are not, of course, able to collect as much radiation as a radio-wave bucket that is 1 kilometer across). to get even better resolution, astronomers combine a large number of radio dishes into an interferometer array. in effect, such an array works like a large number of two-dish interferometers, all observing the same part of the sky together. computer processing of the results permits the reconstruction of a high-resolution radio image. the most extensive such instrument in the united states is the national radio astronomy observatory’s jansky very large array (vla) near socorro, new mexico. it consists of 27 movable radio telescopes (on railroad tracks), each having an aperture of 25 meters, spread over a total span of about 36 kilometers. by electronically combining the signals from all of its individual telescopes, this array permits the 6.4 • radio telescopes 205 radio astronomer to make pictures of the sky at radio wavelengths comparable to those obtained with a visible-light telescope, with a resolution of about 1 arcsecond.
the atacama large millimeter/submillimeter array (alma) in the atacama desert of northern chile (figure 6.20), at an altitude of 16,400 feet, consists of 12 7-meter and 54 12-meter telescopes, and can achieve baselines up to 16 kilometers. since it became operational in 2013, it has made observations at resolutions down to 6 milliarcseconds (0.006 arcseconds), a remarkable achievement for radio astronomy. figure 6.20 atacama large millimeter/submillimeter array (alma). located in the atacama desert of northern chile, alma currently provides the highest resolution for radio observations. (credit: eso/s. guisard) watch this documentary (https://openstax.org/l/30almadoc) that explains the work that went into designing and building alma, discusses some of its first images, and explores its future. initially, the size of interferometer arrays was limited by the requirement that all of the dishes be physically wired together. the maximum dimensions of the array were thus only a few tens of kilometers.
however, larger interferometer separations can be achieved if the telescopes do not require a physical connection. astronomers, with the use of current technology and computing power, have learned to time the arrival of electromagnetic waves coming from space very precisely at each telescope and combine the data later. if the telescopes are as far apart as california and australia, or as west virginia and crimea in ukraine, the resulting resolution far surpasses that of visible-light telescopes. the united states operates the very long baseline array (vlba), made up of 10 individual telescopes stretching from the virgin islands to hawaii (figure 6.21). the vlba, completed in 1993, can form astronomical images with a resolution of 0.0001 arcseconds, permitting features as small as 10 astronomical units (au) to be distinguished at the center of our galaxy. figure 6.21 very long baseline array. this map shows the distribution of 10 antennas that constitute an array of radio telescopes stretching across the united states and its territories. recent advances in technology have also made it possible to do interferometry at visible-light and infrared wavelengths.
at the beginning of the twenty-first century, three observatories with multiple telescopes each link to learning 206 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page224_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page224_img2.jpeg] began using their dishes as interferometers, combining their light to obtain a much greater resolution. in addition, a dedicated interferometric array was built on mt. wilson in california. just as in radio arrays, these observations allow astronomers to make out more detail than a single telescope could provide.