the european union, the united states, south korea, japan, china, russia, switzerland, and india are collaborating on the international thermonuclear experimental reactor (iter), a project to demonstrate the feasibility of controlled fusion (figure 16.9). the facility is being built in france. construction will require over 10,000,000 components and 2000 workers for assembly. the date for the start of operations is yet to be determined. link to learning making connections 554 16 • the sun: a nuclear powerhouse access for free at openstax.org iter is based on the tokamak design, in which a large doughnut-shaped container is surrounded by superconducting magnets to confine and control the hydrogen nuclei in a strong magnetic field. previous fusion experiments have produced about 15 million watts of energy, but only for a second or two, and they have required 100 million watts to produce the conditions necessary to achieve fusion. the goal of iter is to build the first fusion device capable of producing 500 million watts of fusion energy for up to 1000 seconds. the challenge is keeping the deuterium and tritium—which will participate in fusion reactions—hot enough and dense enough, for a long enough time to produce energy.
figure 16.9 iter design. the bright yellow areas in this model show where the superconducting magnets will circle the chamber within which fusion will take place. a huge magnet will keep the charged nuclei of heavy hydrogen confined. the goal is to produce 500 megawatts of energy. (credit: modification of work by stephan mosel) 16.3 the solar interior: theory learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: fusion of protons can occur in the center of the sun only if the temperature exceeds 12 million k. how do we know that the sun is actually this hot? to determine what the interior of the sun might be like, it is necessary to resort to complex calculations. since we can’t see the interior of the sun, we have to use our understanding of physics, combined with what we see at the surface, to construct a mathematical model of what must be happening in the interior. astronomers use observations to build a computer program containing everything they think they know about the physical processes going on in the sun’s interior. the computer then calculates the temperature and pressure at every point inside the sun and determines what nuclear reactions, if any, are taking place.
for some calculations, we can use observations to determine whether the computer program is producing results that match what we see. in this way, the program evolves with ever-improving observations. describe the state of equilibrium of the sun understand the energy balance of the sun explain how energy moves outward through the sun describe the structure of the solar interior 16.3 • the solar interior: theory 555 [image: astronomy_openstax_page573_img1.jpeg] the computer program can also calculate how the sun will change with time. after all, the sun must change. in its center, the sun is slowly depleting its supply of hydrogen and creating helium instead. will the sun get hotter? cooler? larger? smaller? brighter? fainter? ultimately, the changes in the center could be catastrophic, since eventually all the hydrogen fuel hot enough for fusion will be exhausted. either a new source of energy must be found, or the sun will cease to shine. we will describe the ultimate fate of the sun in later chapters. for now, let’s look at some of the things we must teach the computer about the sun in order to carry out such calculations.
the sun is a plasma the sun is so hot that all of the material in it is in the form of an ionized gas, called a plasma. plasma acts much like a hot gas, which is easier to describe mathematically than either liquids or solids. the particles that constitute a gas are in rapid motion, frequently colliding with one another. this constant bombardment is the pressure of the gas (figure 16.10). figure 16.10 gas pressure. the particles in a gas are in rapid motion and produce pressure through collisions with the surrounding material. here, particles are shown bombarding the sides of an imaginary container. more particles within a given volume of gas produce more pressure because the combined impact of the moving particles increases with their number. the pressure is also greater when the molecules or atoms are moving faster. since the molecules move faster when the temperature is hotter, higher temperatures produce higher pressure. the sun is stable the sun, like the majority of other stars, is stable; it is neither expanding nor contracting. such a star is said to be in a condition of equilibrium. all the forces within it are balanced, so that at each point within the star, the temperature, pressure, density, and so on are maintained at constant values.