recent observatories in space observatory date operation began bands of the spectrum notes website james webb space telescope (jwst) 2022 infrared (ir) 6.5-m mirror; images and spectra webb.nasa.gov hubble space telescope (hst) 1990 visible, uv, ir 2.4-m mirror; images and spectra hubblesite.org chandra x-ray observatory 1999 x-rays x-ray images and spectra chandra.si.edu xmm-newton 1999 x-rays x-ray spectroscopy cosmos.esa.int/ web/xmm-newton international gamma-ray astrophysics laboratory (integral) 2002 x- and gamma- rays higher resolution gamma-ray images sci.esa.int/integral/ spitzer space telescope 2003 ir 0.85-m telescope spitzer.caltech.edu fermi gamma-ray space telescope 2008 gamma- rays first high-energy gamma-ray observations fermi.gsfc.nasa.gov kepler 2009 visible- light planet finder kepler.nasa.gov wide-field infrared survey explorer (wise) 2009 ir whole-sky map, asteroid searches nasa.gov/ mission_pages/ wise/main gaia 2013 visible- light precise map of the milky way sci.esa.int/gaia/ transiting exoplanet survey satellite (tess) 2018 visible- light planet finder tess.mit.edu table 6.4 6.5 • observations outside earth’s atmosphere 213 6.6 the future of large telescopes learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: if you’ve ever gone on a hike, you have probably been eager to see what lies just around the next bend in the path.
researchers are no different, and astronomers and engineers are working on the technologies that will allow us to explore even more distant parts of the universe and to see them more clearly. as we saw earlier, the premier space facility for the coming decade will be the james webb space telescope (figure 6.27). its work is just beginning, but its flawless deployment in the first half of 2022 has given astronomers a strong sense of optimism about its ability to probe the infrared universe. the smaller hubble space telescope is still functioning after more than 30 years in space. nasa is also looking at launching (around 2027) the nancy grace roman space telescope, an infrared instrument which will have a smaller mirror but a wider field of view than the webb. figure 6.27 james webb space telescope (jwst). this image shows some of the mirrors of the jwst as they underwent cryogenic testing. the mirrors were exposed to extreme temperatures in order to gather accurate measurements on changes in their shape as they heated and cooled.
(credit: nasa/msfc/david higginbotham/emmett given) on the ground, astronomers have started building the vera rubin observatory1 , which has an 8.4-meter telescope with a significantly larger field of view than any existing telescopes. it will rapidly scan the sky to find transients, phenomena that change quickly, such as exploding stars and chunks of rock that orbit near earth. it is expected to see first light in 2022. the international gamma-ray community is planning the cherenkov telescope array (cta), two arrays of telescopes, one in each hemisphere, which will indirectly measure gamma rays from the ground. the cta will measure gamma-ray energies a thousand times as great as the fermi telescope can detect. several groups of astronomers around the globe interested in studying visible light and the infrared are exploring the feasibility of building ground-based telescopes with mirrors larger than 30 meters across. stop and think what this means: 30 meters is one-third the length of a football field. it is technically impossible to build and transport a single astronomical mirror that is 30 meters or larger in diameter.