the cosmically abundant elements element1 symbol number of atoms per million hydrogen atoms hydrogen h 1,000,000 helium he 80,000 carbon c 450 nitrogen n 92 oxygen o 740 neon ne 130 magnesium mg 40 silicon si 37 table 1.1 1 this list of elements is arranged in order of the atomic number, which is the number of protons in each nucleus. 1.8 • the universe of the very small 27 element1 symbol number of atoms per million hydrogen atoms sulfur s 19 iron fe 32 table 1.1 all atoms consist of a central, positively charged nucleus surrounded by negatively charged electrons. the bulk of the matter in each atom is found in the nucleus, which consists of positive protons and electrically neutral neutrons all bound tightly together in a very small space. each element is defined by the number of protons in its atoms. thus, any atom with 6 protons in its nucleus is called carbon, any with 50 protons is called tin, and any with 70 protons is called ytterbium.
(for a list of the elements, see appendix k.) the distance from an atomic nucleus to its electrons is typically 100,000 times the size of the nucleus itself. this is why we say that even solid matter is mostly space. the typical atom is far emptier than the solar system out to neptune. (the distance from earth to the sun, for example, is only 100 times the size of the sun.) this is one reason atoms are not like miniature solar systems. remarkably, physicists have discovered that everything that happens in the universe, from the smallest atomic nucleus to the largest superclusters of galaxies, can be explained through the action of only four forces: gravity, electromagnetism (which combines the actions of electricity and magnetism), and two forces that act at the nuclear level. the fact that there are four forces (and not a million, or just one) has puzzled physicists and astronomers for many years and has led to a quest for a unified picture of nature. to construct an atom, particle by particle, check out this guided animation (https://openstax.org/l/ 30buildanatom) for building an atom.
1.9 a conclusion and a beginning if you are new to astronomy, you have probably reached the end of our brief tour in this chapter with mixed emotions. on the one hand, you may be fascinated by some of the new ideas you’ve read about and you may be eager to learn more. on the other hand, you may be feeling a bit overwhelmed by the number of topics we have covered, and the number of new words and ideas we have introduced. learning astronomy is a little like learning a new language: at first it seems there are so many new expressions that you’ll never master them all, but with practice, you soon develop facility with them. at this point you may also feel a bit small and insignificant, dwarfed by the cosmic scales of distance and time. but, there is another way to look at what you have learned from our first glimpses of the cosmos. let us consider the history of the universe from the big bang to today and compress it, for easy reference, into a single year.
(we have borrowed this idea from carl sagan’s 1977 pulitzer prize-winning book, the dragons of eden.) on this scale, the big bang happened at the first moment of january 1, and this moment, when you are reading this chapter would be the end of the very last second of december 31. when did other events in the development of the universe happen in this “cosmic year?” our solar system formed around september 10, link to learning 28 1 • science and the universe: a brief tour access for free at openstax.org and the oldest rocks we can date on earth go back to the third week in september (figure 1.15). figure 1.15 charting cosmic time. on a cosmic calendar, where the time since the big bang is compressed into 1 year, creatures we would call human do not emerge on the scene until the evening of december 31. (credit: february: modification of work by nasa, jpl-caltech, w.