(credit a: modification of work by nasa; credit b: modification of work by nasa/gsfc) to get a good visual sense of the degree to which the bursts come from all over the sky, watch this short animated nasa video (https://openstax.org/l/30swiftnasavid) showing the location of the first 500 bursts found by the later swift satellite. for several years, astronomers actively debated whether the burst sources were relatively nearby or very far away—the two possibilities for bursts that are isotropically distributed. nearby locations might include the cloud of comets that surrounds the solar system or the halo of our galaxy, which is large and spherical, and also surrounds us in all directions. if, on the other hand, the bursts occurred at very large distances, they could come from faraway galaxies, which are also distributed uniformly in all directions. both the very local and the very distant hypotheses required something strange to be going on. if the bursts were coming from the cold outer reaches of our own solar system or from the halo of our galaxy, then astronomers had to hypothesize some new kind of physical process that could produce unpredictable flashes of high-energy gamma rays in these otherwise-quiet regions of space.
and if the bursts came from galaxies millions or billions of light-years away, then they must be extremely powerful to be observable at such large distances; indeed they had to be the among the biggest explosions in the universe. the first afterglows the problem with trying to figure out the source of the gamma-ray bursts was that our instruments for detecting gamma rays could not pinpoint the exact place in the sky where the burst was happening. early gamma-ray telescopes did not have sufficient resolution. this was frustrating because astronomers suspected that if they could pinpoint the exact position of one of these rapid bursts, then they would be able to identify a link to learning 23.6 • the mystery of the gamma-ray bursts 807 [image: astronomy_openstax_page825_img1.jpeg] counterpart (such as a star or galaxy) at other wavelengths and learn much more about the burst, including where it came from. this would, however, require either major improvements in gamma-ray detector technology to provide better resolution or detection of the burst at some other wavelength. in the end, both techniques played a role. the breakthrough came with the launch of the italian dutch bepposax satellite in 1996.
bepposax included a new type of gamma-ray telescope capable of identifying the position of a source much more accurately than previous instruments, to within a few minutes of arc on the sky. by itself, however, it was still not sophisticated enough to determine the exact source of the gamma-ray burst. after all, a box a few minutes of arc on a side could still contain many stars or other celestial objects. however, the angular resolution of bepposax was good enough to tell astronomers where to point other, more precise telescopes in the hopes of detecting longer-lived electromagnetic emission from the bursts at other wavelengths. detection of a burst at visible-light or radio wavelengths could provide a position accurate to a few seconds of arc and allow the position to be pinpointed to an individual star or galaxy. bepposax carried its own x-ray telescope onboard the spacecraft to look for such a counterpart, and astronomers using visible-light and radio facilities on the ground were eager to search those wavelengths as well. two crucial bepposax burst observations in 1997 helped to resolve the mystery of the gamma-ray bursts. the first burst came in february from the direction of the constellation orion.
within 8 hours, astronomers working with the satellite had identified the position of the burst, and reoriented the spacecraft to focus bepposax’s x-ray detector on the source. to their excitement, they detected a slowly fading x-ray source 8 hours after the event—the first successful detection of an afterglow from a gamma-ray burst. this provided an even-better location of the burst (accurate to about 40 seconds of arc), which was then distributed to astronomers across the world to try to detect it at even longer wavelengths. that very night, the 4.2-meter william herschel telescope on the canary islands found a fading visible-light source at the same position as the x-ray afterglow, confirming that such an afterglow could be detected in visible light as well. eventually, the afterglow faded away, but left behind at the location of the original gamma- ray burst was a faint, fuzzy source right where the fading point of light had been—a distant galaxy (figure 23.20). this was the first piece of evidence that gamma-ray bursts were indeed very energetic objects from very far away.