these four images of a solar flare on october 22, 2012, show from the left: light from the sun at a wavelength of 171 angstroms, which shows the structure of loops of solar material in the corona; ultraviolet at 304 angstroms, which shows light from the region of the sun’s atmosphere where flares originate; light at 335 angstroms, which highlights radiation from active regions in the corona; a magnetogram, which shows magnetically active regions on the sun. note how these different types of activity all occur above a sunspot region with a strong magnetic field.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/sdo/goddard) 15.4 space weather learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: in the previous sections, we have seen that some of the particles coming off the sun—either steadily as in the solar wind or in great bursts like cmes—will reach earth and its magnetosphere (the zone of magnetic explain what space weather is and how it affects earth 15.4 • space weather 529 [image: astronomy_openstax_page547_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page547_img2.jpeg] influence that surrounds our planet). as if scientists did not have enough trouble trying to predict weather on earth, this means that they are now facing the challenge of predicting the effects of solar storms on earth. this field of research is called space weather; when that weather turns stormy, our technology turns out to be at risk.
with thousands of satellites in orbit, astronauts taking up long-term residence in the international space station, millions of people using cell phones, gps, and wireless communication, and nearly everyone relying on the availability of dependable electrical power, governments are now making major investments in trying to learn how to predict when solar storms will occur and how strongly they will affect earth. some history what we now study as space weather was first recognized (though not yet understood) in 1859, in what is now known as the carrington event. in early september of that year, two amateur astronomers, including richard carrington in england, independently observed a solar flare. this was followed a day or two later by a significant solar storm reaching the region of earth’s magnetic field, which was soon overloaded with charged particles (see earth as a planet). as a result, aurora activity was intense and the northern lights were visible well beyond their normal locations near the poles—as far south as hawaii and the caribbean. the glowing lights in the sky were so intense that some people reported getting up in the middle of the night, thinking it must be daylight.
the 1859 solar storm happened at a time when a new technology was beginning to tie people in the united states and some other countries together: the telegraph system. this was a machine and network for sending messages in code through overhead electrical wires (a bit like a very early version of the internet). the charged particles that overwhelmed earth’s magnetic field descended toward our planet’s surface and affected the wires of the telegraph system. sparks were seen coming out of exposed wires and out of the telegraph machines in the system’s offices. the observation of the bright flare that preceded these effects on earth led to scientific speculation that a connection existed between solar activity and impacts on earth—this was the beginning of our understanding of what today we call space weather. watch nasa scientists answer some questions (https://openstax.org/l/30spcweath) about space weather, and discuss (https://openstax.org/l/30spcweath2) some effects it can have in space and on earth. sources of space weather three solar phenomena—coronal holes, solar flares, and cmes—account for most of the space weather we experience. coronal holes allow the solar wind to flow freely away from the sun, unhindered by solar magnetic fields.