laplace and the nebular hypothesis the late 18th – early 19th centuries witnessed more than just new telescopes and new observations. astronomical theory also evolved after newton’s theory of gravity. questions arose as to the origins of the solar system and how it developed. one line of speculation that had implications for current theories of solar system evolution was the nebular hypothesis. the nebular hypothesis was first suggested by scientist/theologian emanuel swedenborg in 1734, and expanded by philosopher immanuel kant in 1755. but it took on its most detailed and plausible form in the work of pierre-simon laplace. this version of the theory survived well into the 19th century. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page452_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 453 laplace (1749-1827) was sent by his father to the university of caen in normandy, france, to study theology. but early on he discovered a great talent for mathematics, so he abandoned normandy for paris.
recognized by such pillars of french science as joseph-louis lagrange and jean le rond d’alembert, they found laplace stable employment as a teacher. his main fields of mathematics were in probability and statistics, and later he considered problems in astronomy related to the long-term stability of the solar system. it was out of this later work that he produced the nebular hypothesis. beginning with a large cloud of incandescent gas, a rotating disk of material formed as the cloud cooled and condensed. as this process continued, the speed of rotation increased, causing successive rings of material to be cast off. from these rings, planets condensed one-by-one to form the solar system as we know it today. a general outline of this process was published in 1796 in his exposition du système du monde, (exposition of the system of the world), and a full, mathematically reasoned version later appeared in his mécanique céleste (celestial mechanics, vol. 1 and 2, 1799, with a total of 5 volumes through 1825).
the physics of this model was later criticized by the great 19th century physicist james clerk maxwell, who demonstrated that laplace’s theory must be rejected because it fails to conserve angular momentum. but portions of the nebular hypothesis were revived in the 20th century, including the sun “condensing” out of a gaseous nebula, and the formation of protoplanetary disks. finally, stellar parallax the story of how stellar parallax was successfully observed for the first time is the story of two men. one, the telescope builder, was joseph von fraunhofer; the other, the astronomer, was friedrich bessel. by the 1820’s, several astronomers across europe had taken up this challenge, using differing strategies, equipment and techniques. so there was a bit of a competition going on, though a friendly one. but it was bessel who was the eventual winner when he became the first to publish his results in 1838. joseph von fraunhofer (1787-1826) was born in bavaria and was orphaned at age 11.
he became apprenticed to a glassmaker, whose shop was so ramshackle that it collapsed, trapping the 14-year-old joseph in the rubble. by chance, the prince-elector of bavaria, maximilian joseph, was passing nearby and organized his rescue. so taken by this apparent miracle, the prince began to take an interest in the boy and arranged to give him books and to require of joseph’s employer time off each day so that he could study. the investment quickly proved fruitful as fraunhofer began to improve many of the processes of glassmaking. by 1809 he became part of the firm’s management, and later its director. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 454 figure 496: dorpat refractor public domain figure 497: konigsberg heliometer public domain beginning with improvements in the design of the furnaces, fraunhofer developed methods for precisely measuring and controlling temperatures. he experimented with formulas for casting new types of glass and developed new methods of testing them. in particular for astronomy, fraunhofer invented new machines for grinding and polishing lenses that were far in advance of the state of the art.