the hottest brown dwarfs are given types l0–l9 (temperatures in the range 2400–1300 k), whereas still cooler (1300–700 k) objects are given types t0–t9 (see figure 17.8). in class l brown dwarfs, the lines of titanium oxide, which are strong in m stars, have 584 17 • analyzing starlight access for free at openstax.org disappeared. this is because the l dwarfs are so cool that atoms and molecules can gather together into dust particles in their atmospheres; the titanium is locked up in the dust grains rather than being available to form molecules of titanium oxide. lines of steam (hot water vapor) are present, along with lines of carbon monoxide and neutral sodium, potassium, cesium, and rubidium. methane (ch4) lines are strong in class-t brown dwarfs, as methane exists in the atmosphere of the giant planets in our own solar system. in 2009, astronomers discovered ultra-cool brown dwarfs with temperatures of 500–600 k. these objects exhibited absorption lines due to ammonia (nh3), which are not seen in t dwarfs.
a new spectral class, y, was created for these objects. as of 2021, over 50 brown dwarfs belonging to spectral class y have been discovered, some with temperatures comparable to that of the human body (about 300 k).2 figure 17.8 brown dwarfs. this illustration shows the sizes and surface temperatures of brown dwarfs teide 1, gliese 229b, and wise1828 in relation to the sun, a red dwarf star (gliese 229a), and jupiter. (credit: modification of work by mpia/v. joergens) most brown dwarfs start out with atmospheric temperatures and spectra like those of true stars with spectral classes of m6.5 and later, even though the brown dwarfs are not hot and dense enough in their interiors to fuse hydrogen. in fact, the spectra of brown dwarfs and true stars are so similar from spectral types late m through l that it is not possible to distinguish the two types of objects based on spectra alone. an independent measure of mass is required to determine whether a specific object is a brown dwarf or a very low mass star.
since brown dwarfs cool steadily throughout their lifetimes, the spectral type of a given brown dwarf changes with time over a billion years or more from late m through l, t, and y spectral types. low-mass brown dwarfs vs. high-mass planets an interesting property of brown dwarfs is that they are all about the same radius as jupiter, regardless of their masses. amazingly, this covers a range of masses from about 13 to 80 times the mass of jupiter (mj). this can make distinguishing a low-mass brown dwarf from a high-mass planet very difficult. 2 the record-holder for the coldest type y dwarf is wise 0855-0714, at around 250 k. 17.3 • the spectra of stars (and brown dwarfs) 585 [image: astronomy_openstax_page603_img1.jpeg] so, what is the difference between a low-mass brown dwarf and a high-mass planet? the international astronomical union considers the distinctive feature to be deuterium fusion. although brown dwarfs do not sustain regular (proton-proton) hydrogen fusion, they are sometimes capable of fusing deuterium (a rare form of hydrogen with one proton and one neutron in its nucleus).
the fusion of deuterium can happen at a lower temperature than the fusion of hydrogen, but the modest supply of deuterium eventually runs out. if an object has enough mass to fuse deuterium (about 13 mj or 0.012 msun), it is a brown dwarf. objects with less than 13 mj do not fuse deuterium and are usually considered planets. 17.4 using spectra to measure stellar radius, composition, and motion learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: analyzing the spectrum of a star can teach us all kinds of things in addition to its temperature. we can measure its detailed chemical composition as well as the pressure in its atmosphere. from the pressure, we get clues about its size. we can also measure its motion toward or away from us and estimate its rotation. clues to the size of a star as we shall see in the stars: a celestial census, stars come in a wide variety of sizes. at some periods in their lives, stars can expand to enormous dimensions. stars of such exaggerated size are called giants. luckily for the astronomer, stellar spectra can be used to distinguish giants from run-of-the-mill stars (such as our sun).