suppose every galaxy has a nearby quasar with a different redshift. how would your answer change and why? b. large ground-based telescopes typically can grant time to only one out of every four astronomers who apply for observing time. one prominent astronomer tried for several years to establish that the redshifts of quasars do not indicate their distances. at first, he was given time on the world’s largest telescope, but eventually it became clearer that quasars were just the centers of active galaxies and that their redshifts really did indicate distance. at that point, he was denied observing time by the committee of astronomers who reviewed such proposals. suppose your group had been the committee. what decision would you have made? why? (in general, what criteria should astronomers have for allowing astronomers whose views completely disagree with the prevailing opinion to be able to pursue their research?) c. based on the information in this chapter and in black holes and curved spacetime, have your group discuss what it would be like near the event horizon of a supermassive black hole in a quasar or active galaxy. make a list of all the reasons a trip to that region would not be good for your health. be specific. d.
before we understood that the energy of quasars comes from supermassive black holes, astronomers were baffled by how such small regions could give off so much energy. a variety of models were suggested, some involving new physics or pretty “far out” ideas from current physics. can your group come up with some areas of astronomy that you have studied in this course where we don’t yet have an explanation for something happening in the cosmos? exercises review questions 1. describe some differences between quasars and normal galaxies. 952 27 • collaborative group activities access for free at openstax.org 2. describe the arguments supporting the idea that quasars are at the distances indicated by their redshifts. 3. in what ways are active galaxies like quasars but different from normal galaxies? 4. why could the concentration of matter at the center of an active galaxy like m87 not be made of stars? 5. describe the process by which the action of a black hole can explain the energy radiated by quasars. 6. describe the observations that convinced astronomers that m87 is an active galaxy. 7. why do astronomers believe that quasars represent an early stage in the evolution of galaxies? 8.
why were quasars and active galaxies not initially recognized as being “special” in some way? 9. what do we now understand to be the primary difference between normal galaxies and active galaxies? 10. what is the typical structure we observe in a quasar at radio frequencies? 11. what evidence do we have that the luminous central region of a quasar is small and compact? thought questions 12. suppose you observe a star-like object in the sky. how can you determine whether it is actually a star or a quasar? 13. why don’t any of the methods for establishing distances to galaxies, described in galaxies (other than hubble’s law itself), work for quasars? 14. one of the early hypotheses to explain the high redshifts of quasars was that these objects had been ejected at very high speeds from other galaxies. this idea was rejected, because no quasars with large blueshifts have been found. explain why we would expect to see quasars with both blueshifted and redshifted lines if they were ejected from nearby galaxies. 15. a friend of yours who has watched many star trek episodes and movies says, “i thought that black holes pulled everything into them.
why then do astronomers think that black holes can explain the great outpouring of energy from quasars?” how would you respond? 16. could the milky way ever become an active galaxy? is it likely to ever be as luminous as a quasar? 17. why are quasars generally so much more luminous (why do they put out so much more energy) than active galaxies? 18. suppose we detect a powerful radio source with a radio telescope. how could we determine whether or not this was a newly discovered quasar and not some nearby radio transmission? 19. a friend tries to convince you that she can easily see a quasar in her backyard telescope. would you believe her claim? figuring for yourself 20. show that no matter how big a redshift (z) we measure, v/c will never be greater than 1. (in other words, no galaxy we observe can be moving away faster than the speed of light.) 21. if a quasar has a redshift of 3.3, at what fraction of the speed of light is it moving away from us? 22.