the nine main rings were discovered in 1977 from observations made of a star as uranus passed in front of it. we call such a passage of one astronomical object in front of another an occultation. during the 1977 occultation, astronomers expected the star’s light to disappear as the planet moved across it. but in addition, the star dimmed briefly several times before uranus reached it, as each narrow ring passed between the star and the telescope. thus, the rings were mapped out in detail even though they could not be seen or photographed directly, like counting the number of cars in a train at night by watching the blinking of a light as the cars successively pass in front of it. when voyager approached uranus in 1986, it was able to study the rings at close range; the spacecraft also photographed two new rings (figure 12.30). figure 12.30 rings of uranus. the voyager team had to expose this image for a long time to get a glimpse of uranus’ narrow dark rings. you can see the grainy structure of “noise” in the electronics of the camera in the picture background.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl) the outermost and most massive of uranus’ rings is called the epsilon ring. it is only about 100 kilometers wide and probably no more than 100 meters thick (similar to the f ring of saturn). the epsilon ring encircles uranus at a distance of 51,000 kilometers, about twice the radius of uranus. this ring probably contains as much mass as all of uranus’ other ten rings combined; most of them are narrow ribbons less than 10 kilometers wide, just the reverse of the broad rings of saturn. the individual particles in the uranian rings are nearly as black as lumps of coal. while astronomers do not understand the composition of this material in detail, it seems to consist in large part of carbon and hydrocarbon compounds. organic material of this sort is rather common in the outer solar system. many of the asteroids and comets are also composed of dark, tarlike materials. in the case of uranus, its ten small inner moons have a similar composition, suggesting that one or more moons might have broken up to make the rings. neptune’s rings are generally similar to those of uranus but even more tenuous (figure 12.31).
there are only four of them, and the particles are not uniformly distributed along their lengths. because these rings are so 422 12 • rings, moons, and pluto access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page440_img1.jpeg] difficult to investigate from earth, it will probably be a long time before we understand them very well. figure 12.31 rings of neptune. this long exposure of neptune’s rings was photographed by voyager 2. note the two denser regions of the outer ring. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl) mark showalter (of the seti institute) and his colleagues maintain the nasa’s planetary ring node (https://openstax.org/l/30nasarings) website. it is full of information about the rings and their interactions with moons; check out their press-release images of the saturn ring system, for example. and showalter gives an entertaining illustrated talk (https://openstax.org/l/30strnrngs) about saturn’s ring and moon system. e x a m p l e 1 2 .
1 resolution of planetary rings using the occultations of stars by the rings of saturn, astronomers have been able to measure details in the ring structure to a resolution of 10 km. this is a much higher resolution than can be obtained in a conventional photo of the rings. let’s figure out what angular resolution (in arcsec) a space telescope in earth orbit would have to achieve to obtain equal resolution. solution to solve this problem, we use the “small-angle formula” to relate angular and linear diameters in the sky. for angles in the sky that are small, the formula is usually written as where angular diameter is expressed in arcsec. the distance of saturn near opposition is about . substituting in the above formula and solving for the angular resolution, we get which is about arcsec, or a milliarcsec. this is not possible for our telescopes to achieve. for link to learning 12.5 • planetary rings (and enceladus) 423 [image: astronomy_openstax_page441_img1.jpeg] comparison, the best resolution from either the hubble space telescope or ground-based telescopes is about 0.1 arcsec, or 100 times worse than what we would need.