most often, these are charge-coupled devices (ccds), which are similar to the detectors used in video camcorders or in digital cameras (like the one more and more students have on their cell phones) (see figure 6.14). in a ccd, photons of radiation hitting any part of the detector generate a stream of charged particles (electrons) that are stored and counted at the end of the exposure. each place where the radiation is counted is called a pixel (picture element), and modern detectors can count the photons in millions of pixels (megapixels, or mps). figure 6.14 charge-coupled devices (ccds). (a) this ccd is a mere 300-micrometers thick (thinner than a human hair) yet holds more than 21 million pixels. (b) this matrix of 42 ccds served the kepler telescope.
(credit a: modification of work by us department of energy; credit b: modification of work by nasa and ball aerospace) because ccds typically record as much as 60–70% of all the photons that strike them, and the best silicon and infrared ccds exceed 90% sensitivity, we can detect much fainter objects. among these are many small moons around the outer planets, icy dwarf planets beyond pluto, and dwarf galaxies of stars. ccds also provide more accurate measurements of the brightness of astronomical objects than photography, and their output is digital—in the form of numbers that can go directly into a computer for analysis. infrared observations observing the universe in the infrared band of the spectrum presents some additional challenges. the infrared region extends from wavelengths near 1 micrometer (µm), which is about the long wavelength sensitivity limit of both ccds and photography, to 100 micrometers or longer. recall from the discussion on radiation and spectra that infrared is “heat radiation” (given off at temperatures that we humans are comfortable with).
the main challenge to astronomers using infrared is to distinguish between the tiny amount of heat radiation that reaches earth from stars and galaxies, and the much greater heat radiated by the telescope itself and our 6.3 • visible-light detectors and instruments 199 [image: astronomy_openstax_page217_img1.jpeg] planet’s atmosphere. typical temperatures on earth’s surface are near 300 k, and the atmosphere through which observations are made is only a little cooler. according to wien’s law (from the chapter on radiation and spectra), the telescope, the observatory, and even the sky are radiating infrared energy with a peak wavelength of about 10 micrometers. to infrared eyes, everything on earth is brightly aglow—including the telescope and camera (figure 6.15). the challenge is to detect faint cosmic sources against this sea of infrared light. another way to look at this is that an astronomer using infrared must always contend with the situation that a visible-light observer would face if working in broad daylight with a telescope and optics lined with bright fluorescent lights. figure 6.15 infrared eyes. infrared waves can penetrate places in the universe from which light is blocked, as shown in this infrared image where the plastic bag blocks visible light but not infrared.
(credit: nasa/jpl-caltech/r. hurt (ssc)) to solve this problem, astronomers must protect the infrared detector from nearby radiation, just as you would shield photographic film from bright daylight. since anything warm radiates infrared energy, the detector must be isolated in very cold surroundings; often, it is held near absolute zero (1 to 3 k) by immersing it in liquid helium. the second step is to reduce the radiation emitted by the telescope structure and optics, and to block this heat from reaching the infrared detector. check out the infrared zoo (https://openstax.org/l/30ifzoo) to get a sense of what familiar objects look like with infrared radiation. slide the slider to change the wavelength of radiation for the picture, and click the arrow to see other animals. spectroscopy spectroscopy is one of the astronomer’s most powerful tools, providing information about the composition, temperature, motion, and other characteristics of celestial objects. more than half of the time spent on most large telescopes is used for spectroscopy. the many different wavelengths present in light can be separated by passing them through a spectrometer to form a spectrum. the design of a simple spectrometer is illustrated in figure 6.16.