(credit “field of view”: modification of work by nasa/kepler mission; credit “spacecraft”: modification of work by nasa/kepler mission/wendy stenzel) what do we mean, exactly, by “discovery” of transiting exoplanets? a single transit shows up as a very slight drop in the brightness of the star, lasting several hours. however, astronomers must be on guard against other factors that might produce a false transit, especially when working at the limit of precision of the telescope. we must wait for a second transit of similar depth. but when another transit is observed, we don’t initially know whether it might be due to another planet in a different orbit. the “discovery” occurs only when a third transit is found with similar depth and the same spacing in time as the first pair. computers normally conduct the analysis, which involves searching for tiny, periodic dips in the light from each star, extending over 4 years of observation. but the kepler mission also has a program in which non- astronomers—citizen scientists—can examine the data.
these dedicated volunteers have found several transits that were missed by the computer analyses, showing that the human eye and brain sometimes recognize unusual events that a computer was not programmed to look for. measuring three or four evenly spaced transits is normally enough to “discover” an exoplanet. but in a new field like exoplanet research, we would like to find further independent verification. the strongest confirmation happens when ground-based telescopes are also able to detect a doppler shift with the same period as the transits. however, this is generally not possible for earth-size planets. one of the most convincing ways to verify that a dip in brightness is due to a planet is to find more planets orbiting the same star—a planetary system. multi-planet systems also provide alternative ways to estimate the masses of the planets, as we will discuss in the next section. the selection effects (or biases) in the kepler data are similar to those in doppler observations. large planets are easier to find than small ones, and short-period planets are easier than long-period planets.
if we require 722 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page740_img1.jpeg] three transits to establish the presence of a planet, we are of course limited to discovering planets with orbital periods less than one-third of the observing interval. thus, it was only in its fourth and final year of operation that kepler was able to find planets with orbits like earth’s that require 1 year to go around their star. direct detection the best possible evidence for an earthlike planet elsewhere would be an image. after all, “seeing is believing” is a very human prejudice. but imaging a distant planet is a formidable challenge indeed. suppose, for example, you were a great distance away and wished to detect reflected light from earth. earth intercepts and reflects less than one billionth of the sun’s radiation, so its apparent brightness in visible light is less than one billionth that of the sun. compounding the challenge of detecting such a faint speck of light, the planet is swamped by the blaze of radiation from its parent star.
even today, the best telescope mirrors’ optics have slight imperfections that prevent the star’s light from coming into focus in a completely sharp point. direct imaging works best for young gas giant planets that emit infrared light and reside at large separations from their host stars. young giant planets emit more infrared light because they have more internal energy, stored from the process of planet formation. even then, clever techniques must be employed to subtract out the light from the host star. in 2008, three such young planets were discovered orbiting hr 8799, a star in the constellation of pegasus (figure 21.21). two years later, a fourth planet was detected closer to the star. additional planets may reside even closer to hr 8799, but if they exist, they are currently lost in the glare of the star. since then, a number of planets around other stars have been found using direct imaging. however, one challenge is to tell whether the objects we are seeing are indeed planets or if they are brown dwarfs (failed stars) in orbit around a star. figure 21.21 exoplanets around hr 8799. this image shows keck telescope observations of four directly imaged planets orbiting hr 8799.