alfred wegener: catching the drift of plate tectonics when studying maps or globes of earth, many students notice that the coast of north and south america, with only minor adjustments, could fit pretty well against the coast of europe and africa. it seems as if these great landmasses could once have been together and then were somehow torn apart. the same idea had occurred to others (including francis bacon as early as 1620), but not until the twentieth century could such a proposal be more than speculation. the scientist who made the case for continental drift in 1920 was a german meteorologist and astronomer named alfred wegener (figure 8.8). figure 8.8 alfred wegener (1880–1930). wegener proposed a scientific theory for the slow shifting of the continents. born in berlin in 1880, wegener was, from an early age, fascinated by greenland, the world’s largest island, which he dreamed of exploring. he studied at the universities in heidelberg, innsbruck, and berlin, receiving a doctorate in astronomy by reexamining thirteenth-century astronomical tables. but, his interests turned more and more toward earth, particularly its weather.
he carried out experiments using kites and link to learning voyagers in astronomy 262 8 • earth as a planet access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page280_img1.jpeg] balloons, becoming so accomplished that he and his brother set a world record in 1906 by flying for 52 hours in a balloon. wegener first conceived of continental drift in 1910 while examining a world map in an atlas, but it took 2 years for him to assemble sufficient data to propose the idea in public. he published the results in book form in 1915. wegener’s evidence went far beyond the congruence in the shapes of the continents. he proposed that the similarities between fossils found only in south america and africa indicated that these two continents were joined at one time. he also showed that resemblances among living animal species on different continents could best be explained by assuming that the continents were once connected in a supercontinent he called pangaea (from greek elements meaning “all land”). wegener’s suggestion was met with a hostile reaction from most scientists. although he had marshaled an impressive list of arguments for his hypothesis, he was missing a mechanism.
no one could explain how solid continents could drift over thousands of miles. a few scientists were sufficiently impressed by wegener’s work to continue searching for additional evidence, but many found the notion of moving continents too revolutionary to take seriously. developing an understanding of the mechanism (plate tectonics) would take decades of further progress in geology, oceanography, and geophysics. wegener was disappointed in the reception of his suggestion, but he continued his research and, in 1924, he was appointed to a special meteorology and geophysics professorship created especially for him at the university of graz (where he was, however, ostracized by most of the geology faculty). four years later, on his fourth expedition to his beloved greenland, he celebrated his fiftieth birthday with colleagues and then set off on foot toward a different camp on the island. he never made it; he was found a few days later, dead of an apparent heart attack. critics of science often point to the resistance to the continental drift hypothesis as an example of the flawed way that scientists regard new ideas.
(many people who have advanced crackpot theories have claimed that they are being ridiculed unjustly, just as wegener was.) but we think there is a more positive light in which to view the story of wegener’s suggestion. scientists in his day maintained a skeptical attitude because they needed more evidence and a clear mechanism that would fit what they understood about nature. once the evidence and the mechanism were clear, wegener’s hypothesis quickly became the centerpiece of our view of a dynamic earth. see how the drift of the continents (https://openstax.org/l/30contintdrift) has changed the appearance of our planet’s crust. rift and subduction zones plates pull apart from each other along rift zones, such as the mid-atlantic ridge, driven by upwelling currents in the mantle (figure 8.9). a few rift zones are found on land. the best known is the central african rift—an area where the african continent is slowly breaking apart. most rift zones, however, are in the oceans. molten rock rises from below to fill the space between the receding plates; this rock is basaltic lava, the kind of igneous rock that forms most of the ocean basins.