it is helpful to remember that the volume of a sphere is related to its radius: answer: the volume of a sphere stretching from the sun to proxima centauri is: therefore, the mass of hydrogen in this sphere is: this is only (4.5 × 1028 kg)/(2.0 × 1030 kg) = 2.2% the mass of the sun. naming the nebulae as you look at the captions for some of the spectacular photographs in this chapter and the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system, you will notice the variety of names given to the nebulae. a few, which in small telescopes look like something recognizable, are sometimes named after the creatures or objects they resemble. examples include the crab, tarantula, and keyhole nebulae. but most have only numbers that are entries in a catalog of astronomical objects. perhaps the best-known catalog of nebulae (as well as star clusters and galaxies) was compiled by the french astronomer charles messier (1730–1817). messier’s passion was discovering comets, and his devotion to this cause earned him the nickname “the comet ferret” from king louis xv.
when comets are first seen coming toward the sun, they look like little fuzzy patches of light; in small telescopes, they are easy to confuse with nebulae or with groupings of many stars so far away that their light is all blended together. time and again, messier’s heart leapt as he thought he had discovered one of his treasured comets, only to find that he had “merely” observed a nebula or cluster. in frustration, messier set out to catalog the position and appearance of over 100 objects that could be mistaken for comets. for him, this list was merely a tool in the far more important work of comet hunting. he would be very surprised if he returned today to discover that no one recalls his comets anymore, but his astronomy basics 670 20 • between the stars: gas and dust in space access for free at openstax.org catalog of “fuzzy things that are not comets” is still widely used. when figure 20.2 refers to m4, it denotes the fourth entry in messier’s list.
visit https://www.nasa.gov/content/goddard/hubble-s-messier-catalog (https://www.nasa.gov/content/goddard/hubble-s-messier-catalog) for a gallery of m objects as photographed with the hubble space telescope. a far more extensive listing was compiled under the title of the new general catalog (ngc) of nebulae and star clusters in 1888 by john dreyer, working at the observatory in armagh, ireland. he based his compilation on the work of william herschel and his son john, plus many other observers who followed them. with the addition of two further listings (called the index catalogs), dreyer’s compilation eventually included 13,000 objects. astronomers today still use his ngc numbers when referring to most nebulae and star groups. 20.2 interstellar gas learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: interstellar gas, depending on where it is located, can be as cold as a few degrees above absolute zero or as hot as a million degrees or more. we will begin our voyage through the interstellar medium by exploring the different conditions under which we find gas.
ionized hydrogen (h ii) regions—gas near hot stars some of the most spectacular astronomical photographs show interstellar gas located near hot stars (figure 20.3). the strongest line in the visible region of the hydrogen spectrum is the red line in the balmer series1 (as explained in the chapter on radiation and spectra); this emission line accounts for the characteristic red glow in images like figure 20.3. figure 20.3 orion nebula. the red glow that pervades the great orion nebula is produced by the first line in the balmer series of name the major types of interstellar gas discuss how we can observe each type describe the temperature and other major properties of each type 1 scientists also call this red balmer line the h-alpha line, with alpha meaning it is the first spectral line in the balmer series. 20.2 • interstellar gas 671 [image: astronomy_openstax_page689_img1.jpeg] hydrogen. hydrogen emission indicates that there are hot young stars nearby that ionize these clouds of gas. when electrons then recombine with protons and move back down into lower energy orbits, emission lines are produced.