selection effect or selection bias the tendency to find large hot jupiters due to biases in our detection methods. semi-detached binary a binary star system where one star has expanded beyond its roche lobe and is sharing material with the other. semi-major axis the major axis is the longest line through an ellipse. the semi-major axis is half of its length. seti the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. these are efforts using radio telescopes to detect signals from intelligent species out there in the galaxy. there have been no successes as of this time. seyfert galaxies active galaxies that resemble normal spiral galaxies, but they are very active. shepherd moons small moons on either side of a ring that gravitationally keep the rings organized. shepherd satellites small moons on either side of a ring that gravitationally keep the rings organized. shield volcanoes the large volcanoes found on venus that are formed over long periods of time by a hot spot in the planet’s crust. singularity the point of all matter and energy in a black hole’s center. slingshot the technique for sending a spacecraft close to a planet to use the planet’s gravity to add speed and change direction.
solar nebula the rotating cloud of dust and gas that surrounded the sun and eventually became our solar system. solar neutrino problem the fact that there are fewer neutrinos detected than are expected due to the rates of production in the sun’s core through fusion. solar system this is the environment around the sun. it is the collection of all objects that are influenced by the sun. it includes the sun (sol), the planets, the dwarf planets, the moons, the asteroids, the comets, the meteors, the kuiper belt astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 412 objects, the oort cloud objects, and the solar wind. solar wind the charged particles flying away from the sun. spacecraft a man-made object that is sent into space for exploration and scientific study. special theory of relativity the scientific theory developed by einstein that says energy can be converted to matter and vice versa. spectroscopic binaries binary stars that are too close together or too far away to be separated visually, but can be separated by observing changes in the spectra. spectroscopic parallax the technique of determining a star’s distance based on its placement on the hr diagram and its apparent magnitude. spectroscope a tool used to observe the spectra being emitted from an object.
spectrum all of the different wavelengths or frequencies of electromagnetic radiation combined. spiral density waves pressure waves (compression) that travel through the galactic disk and are responsible for the formation and persistence of the spiral arms. spiral galaxies a galaxy with spiral arms in a flat galactic disk. they typically have billions of stars. s-process the slow neutron capture process. each neutron is captured by an atom at a rate of about once every few decades. this produces elements up to bismuth and occurs in the final stages of normal fusion in the star’s core. to succeed the atom created must be stable enough not to decay before the next neutron comes along. standard candles type i supernovae have a standard absolute magnitude. this combined with the apparent magnitude can be used to calculate the distance. star a large ball of gas where the temperature and pressure in the core is adequate to support nuclear fusion. star clusters groups of stars (from a few to millions) that were born from the same nebula. they can be open clusters or globular clusters. starburst galaxy a galaxy with lots of new stars being created. this is due to mergers or some other kind of interaction with other galaxies. stellar epoch from 3 billion years to 10 billion years after the big bang.
galaxy formation has stopped but star formation continues. this brings us to the present time. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 413 stellar nucleosynthesis the formation of the elements in a star. stellar parallax the ability to calculate the distance to an object by noting the angle associated with the object’s position relative to background stars from two different observing locations. stratosphere the layer in the earth’s atmosphere above the troposphere. this is the top of the biggest clouds and also where the ozone layer is. strong force this is the fundamental force that holds together the protons and neutrons in the nucleus of atoms. it is a very strong force, but has a very limited range. subduction zone places where one tectonic plate slips under another plate. sunspot cycle every 11 years, the magnetic poles of the sun switch. when this occurs, the sunspots go through a change from a minimum through a maximum. sunspots regions on the sun’s surface that are active magnetically. they are slightly cooler than the rest of the surface and therefore appear darker. superclusters very larger clusters of galaxy clusters. they have a common center around which they all rotate and are gravitationally bound together.