what such observations show is that if a protostar is less than about 1 to 3 million years old, its disk extends all the way from very close to the surface of the star out to tens or hundreds of au away. in older protostars, we find disks with outer parts that still contain large amounts of dust, but the inner regions have lost most of their dust. in these objects, the disk looks like a donut, with the protostar centered in its hole. the inner, dense parts of most disks have disappeared by the time the stars are 10 million years old (figure 21.14). figure 21.14 protoplanetary disks around two stars. the left view of each star shows infrared observations by the hubble space telescope of their protoplanetary disks. the central star is much brighter than the surrounding disk, so the instrument includes a coronagraph, which has a small shield that blocks the light of the central star but allows the surrounding disk to be imaged. the right image of each star shows models of the disks based on the observations. the star hd 141943 has an age of about 17 million years, while hd 191089 is about 12 million years old.
(credit: modification of work by nasa, esa, r. soummer and m. perrin (stsci), l. pueyo (stsci/johns hopkins university), c. chen and d. golimowski (stsci), j.b. hagan (stsci/purdue university), t. mittal (university of california, berkeley/johns hopkins university), e. choquet, m. moerchen, and m. n’diaye (stsci), a. rajan (arizona state university), s. wolff (stsci/purdue university), j. debes and d. hines (stsci), and g. schneider (steward observatory/university of arizona)) calculations show that the formation of one or more planets could produce such a donut-like distribution of dust. suppose a planet forms a few au away from the protostar, presumably due to the gathering together of matter from the disk. as the planet grows in mass, the process clears out a dust-free region in its immediate neighborhood.
calculations also show that any small dust particles and gas that were initially located in the region between the protostar and the planet, and that are not swept up by the planet, will then fall onto the star very quickly in about 50,000 years. matter lying outside the planet’s orbit, in contrast, is prevented from moving into the hole by the gravitational forces exerted by the planet. (we saw something similar in saturn’s rings, where the action of the shepherd moons keeps the material near the edge of the rings from spreading out.) if the formation of a planet is indeed what produces and sustains holes in the disks that surround very young stars, then planets must form in 3 to 30 million years. this is a short period compared with the lifetimes of most stars and shows that the 21.3 • evidence that planets form around other stars 713 [image: astronomy_openstax_page731_img1.jpeg] formation of planets may be a quick byproduct of the birth of stars. calculations show that accretion can drive the rapid growth of planets—small, dust-grain-size particles orbiting in the disk collide and stick together, with the larger collections growing more rapidly as they attract and capture smaller ones.
once these clumps grow to about 10 centimeters in size or so, they enter a perilous stage in their development. at that size, unless they can grow to larger than about 100 meters in diameter, they are subject to drag forces produced by friction with the gas in the disk—and their orbits can rapidly decay, plunging them into the host star. therefore, these bodies must rapidly grow to nearly 1 kilometer in size in diameter to avoid a fiery fate. at this stage, they are considered planetesimals (the small chunks of solid matter—ice and dust particles—that you learned about in other worlds: an introduction to the solar system). once they survive to those sizes, the largest survivors will continue to grow by accreting smaller planetesimals; ultimately, this process results in a few large planets. if the growing planets reach a mass bigger than about 10 times the mass of earth, their gravity is strong enough to capture and hold on to hydrogen gas that remains in the disk. at that point, they will grow in mass and radius rapidly, reaching giant planet dimensions.