some variable stars are a bit outside of the instability strip. the bright yellow oval is the realm of the rv tauri variable stars and the orange oval is the realm of the mira variable stars. whereas most variable stars are nearing the end of their life, there is one other type that are protostars on their way to becoming stars: t-tauri variable stars. these pre-main sequence stars have not yet initiated fusion. the reddish oval is the realm of the t-tauri stars. stellar mass and radii another use for the hr diagram is to show the location of stars of different stellar sizes (or radii) as well as the mass for stars along the main sequence. the small black boxes along the main sequence (stellar type v) in figure 303 represent stars of different solar masses. the red diagonal lines represent stars of different solar radii or solar diameters. although there are stars much heavier than the 20 solar masses shown near the top of the main sequence, they are not shown on this diagram. the largest stars known have a radius that is over 1500 times that of the sun (solar radii).
if our sun were to become a star this size, the surface of the sun, the photosphere, would extend beyond the orbit of jupiter (out to almost 7 au). the most massive star known is 265 times the mass of the sun (solar masses). very massive stars are quite rare. they tend to have very short lifetimes and therefore there are very few of them in existance in the observable neighborhood.
astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 258 figure 302: hr diagram with regions [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page258_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 259 figure 303: stellar masses and stellar radii [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page259_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 260 equation 15: calculating stellar size 𝐿= 4𝜋𝜎𝑅2𝑇4 or 𝑅= √ 1 4𝜋𝜎𝑇4 equation 16: size in solar radii 𝑅= √𝐿 𝑇2 component 108 – the sizes of stars dwarf stars the stars in the hr diagram come in many sizes. all stars on the main sequence on the hr- diagram are considered dwarf stars. this is also true of all stars below the main sequence. note that the blue stars on the main sequence could be 10 times larger than the sun, and the red dwarfs can be as small as 1/10 the size of the sun, but they are all considered dwarfs.
giant stars all stars above the main sequence are considered to be giant stars. these can range in size from 10 to 1000 times the size of the sun. some of these stars are considered supergiants and even hypergiants. calculating the size of a star the size of a star can be calculated if we know its luminosity and temperature. temperature can be measured spectroscopically and the luminosity can be estimated from the hr-diagram. the equation uses luminosity in watts, radius in kilometers, and the temperature in k. the relationship is shown in equation 15. if we use solar units; l is solar luminosities (3.9 * 1026 watts), r is solar radii (6.96*105 km), and t is solar temperatures (5,800 k), then the equation becomes much simpler and is shown in equation 16 astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 261 a star fuses hydrogen into helium component 109 – special members of the stellar family some members of the stellar family are not really stars. the dwarf stars (red through violet), the giant stars, and the supergiant stars are all really stars.