(a number of other exotic particles have also been suggested as prime constituents of dark matter, but we will confine our discussion to wimps as a useful example.) if large numbers of wimps do exist, then some of them should be passing through our physics laboratories right now. the trick is to catch them. since by definition they interact only weakly (infrequently) with other matter, the chances that they will have a measurable effect are small. we don’t know the mass of these particles, but various theories suggest that it might be a few to a few hundred times the mass of a proton. if wimps are 60 times the mass of a proton, there would be about 10 million of them passing through your outstretched hand every second—with absolutely no effect on you. if that seems too mind-boggling, bear in mind that neutrinos interact weakly with ordinary matter, and yet we were able to “catch” them eventually. despite the challenges, more than 30 experiments designed to detect wimps are in operation or in the 1036 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1054_img1.jpeg] planning stages.
predictions of how many times wimps might actually collide with the nucleus of an atom in the instrument designed to detect them are in the range of 1 event per year to 1 event per 1000 years per kilogram of detector. the detector must therefore be large. it must be shielded from radioactivity or other types of particles, such as neutrons, passing through it, and hence these detectors are placed in deep mines. the energy imparted to an atomic nucleus in the detector by collision with a wimp will be small, and so the detector must be cooled to a very low temperature. the wimp detectors are made out of crystals of germanium, silicon, or xenon. the detectors are cooled to a few thousandths of a degree—very close to absolute zero. that means that the atoms in the detector are so cold that they are scarcely vibrating at all. if a dark matter particle collides with one of the atoms, it will cause the whole crystal to vibrate and the temperature therefore to increase ever so slightly. some other interactions may generate a detectable flash of light.
a different kind of search for wimps is being conducted at the large hadron collider (lhc) at cern, europe’s particle physics lab near geneva, switzerland. in this experiment, protons collide with enough energy potentially to produce wimps. the lhc detectors cannot detect the wimps directly, but if wimps are produced, they will pass through the detectors, carrying energy away with them. experimenters will then add up all the energy that they detect as a result of the collisions of protons to determine if any energy is missing. so far, none of these experiments has detected wimps. will the newer experiments pay off? or will scientists have to search for some other explanation for dark matter? only time will tell (figure 29.23). figure 29.23 dark matter. this cartoon from nasa takes a humorous look at how little we yet understand about dark matter. (credit: nasa) dark matter and the formation of galaxies as elusive as dark matter may be in the current-day universe, galaxies could not have formed quickly without it. galaxies grew from density fluctuations in the early universe, and some had already formed only about 400–500 million years after the big bang.
the observations with wmap, planck, and other experiments give us information on the size of those density fluctuations. it turns out that the density variations we observe are too small to have formed galaxies so soon after the big bang. in the hot, early universe, energetic photons 29.5 • what is the universe really made of? 1037 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1055_img1.jpeg] collided with hydrogen and helium, and kept them moving so rapidly that gravity was still not strong enough to cause the atoms to come together to form galaxies. how can we reconcile this with the fact that galaxies did form and are all around us? our instruments that measure the cmb give us information about density fluctuations only for ordinary matter, which interacts with radiation. dark matter, as its name indicates, does not interact with photons at all. dark matter could have had much greater variations in density and been able to come together to form gravitational “traps” that could then have begun to attract ordinary matter immediately after the universe became transparent. as ordinary matter became increasingly concentrated, it could have turned into galaxies quickly thanks to these dark matter traps. for an analogy, imagine a boulevard with traffic lights every half mile or so.