in the densest regions in the spiral arms, shown in yellow, the gas is collected into giant molecular clouds. low-density holes in the spiral arms, shown in blue, are the result of supernova explosions. (credit: modification of work by mark krumholz) at any given time in the milky way, the majority of the interstellar gas by mass and volume is in the form of atomic hydrogen. the much-denser molecular clouds occupy a tiny fraction of the volume of interstellar space but add roughly 30% to the total mass of gas between the stars. conversely, the hot gas produced by supernova explosions contributes a negligible mass but occupies a significant fraction of the volume of interstellar space. h ii regions, though they are visually spectacular, constitute only a very small fraction of either the mass or volume of interstellar material. however, the interstellar medium is not a closed system. gas from intergalactic space constantly falls onto the milky way due to its gravity, adding new gas to the interstellar medium.
conversely, in giant molecular clouds where gas collects together due to gravity, the gas can collapse to form new stars, as discussed in the birth of explain how interstellar matter flows into and out of our galaxy and transforms from one phase to another, and understand how star formation and evolution affects the properties of the interstellar medium explain how the heavy elements and dust grains found in interstellar space got there and describe how dust grains help produce molecules that eventually find their way into planetary systems 688 20 • between the stars: gas and dust in space access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page706_img1.jpeg] stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system. this process locks interstellar matter into stars. as the stars age, evolve, and eventually die, massive stars lose a large fraction of their mass, and low-mass stars lose very little. on average, roughly one-third of the matter incorporated into stars goes back into interstellar space. supernova explosions have so much energy that they can drive interstellar mass out of the galaxy and back into intergalactic space.
thus, the total amount of mass of the interstellar medium is set by a competition between the gain of mass from intergalactic space, the conversion of interstellar mass into stars, and the loss of interstellar mass back into intergalactic space due to supernovae. this entire process is known as the baryon cycle—baryon is from the greek word for “heavy,” and the cycle has this name because it is the repeating process that the heavier components of the universe—the atoms—undergo. the cycle of dust and heavy elements while much of the mass of the interstellar medium is material accreted during the last few billion years from intergalactic space, this is not true of the elements heavier than hydrogen and helium, or of the dust. instead, these components of the interstellar medium were made inside stars in the milky way, which returned them to the interstellar medium at the end of their lives. we will talk more about this process in later chapters, but for now just bear in mind what we learned in the sun: a nuclear powerhouse. what stars “do for a living” is fuse heavier elements from lighter ones, producing energy in the process.
as stars mature, they begin to lose some of the newly made elements to the reservoir of interstellar matter. the same is true of dust grains. dust forms when grains can condense in regions where gas is dense and cool. one place where the right conditions are found is the winds from luminous cool stars (the red giants and supergiants we discussed in the stars: a celestial census). grains can also condense in the matter thrown off by a supernova explosion as the ejected gases begin to cool. the dust grains produced by stars may grow even further when they spend time in the dense parts of the interstellar medium, inside molecular clouds. in these environments, grains can stick together or gather additional atoms from the gas around them, growing larger. they also facilitate the production of other compounds, including some of the more complex molecules we discussed earlier. the surfaces of the dust grains (see cosmic dust)—which would seem very large if you were an atom—provide “nooks and crannies” where these atoms can stick long enough to find partners and form molecules. (think of the dust grains as “interstellar social clubs” where lonely atoms can meet and form meaningful relationships.) eventually, the dust grains become coated with ices.