this made it possible to determine its distance: 660,000 au, which meant that the actual velocity of 61 cygni relative to the earth was 170,000 miles per hour, truly a “flying star.” to check his work, bessel completely disassembled his telescope and re- assembled it, searching for any source of error. he then repeated his observations of 61 cygni, measuring the parallax this time as 0.348 arc-seconds, a difference of about 10% from the original (the modern value is 0.287 arc-seconds). bessel was offered the directorship at the prestigious berlin observatory, but he turned it down to stay in konigsberg. but his fame as an astronomer allowed him finally to travel the world, receiving honors wherever he went. the discovery of neptune johann gottfried galle (1812-1910) was designated by king friedrich wilhelm iv to be the successor to bessel at the konigsberg observatory in 1847. the year before, on september 23, 1846, galle discovered the planet neptune.
galle was the son of a tar oven operator who believed in the power of education to raise his son’s prospects. he sent johann to the friedrich wilhelms university in berlin in 1830, where, after graduation, he briefly taught mathematics and physics before becoming an assistant to johan franz encke at the berlin observatory in 1835. the berlin 22.5cm refractor had been begun by fraunhofer, and after his death was completed to his specifications by his assistants, so it was a premier instrument. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 458 figure 498: blackbody curves while working as an assistant, galle completed his ph.d. dissertation in 1845, analyzing observations ole roemer had made in 1706. he sent copies of his work to astronomers across europe for comment and criticism, which was standard practice; and one of the recipients was urbain leverrier, a french mathematician at the paris observatory, where roemer once worked. leverrier did not reply until september, 1846, but his letter did not mention roemer.
urbain leverrier (1811-1877) studied at the école polytechnique, one of france’s top universities, and in the 1830’s he worked briefly with the chemist, joseph louis gay-lussac. when leverrier got bitten by the astronomy bug it was celestial mechanics that attracted him. his earliest work was on the stability of the solar system, a very complex problem involving the gravitational forces of all of the planets acting on each other all of the time. by late 1845, leverrier began to find that observations of the planet uranus could not be accounted for by the influences of the known planets. he concluded that uranus was being “perturbed” by an unknown eighth planet beyond the orbit of uranus. in august, 1846, he finally had a mathematical prediction for the position of the new planet. the paris observatory did not have adequate telescopes, he felt, so he wondered if someone at the berlin observatory would help him out. that’s when he remembered that dissertation about roemer sent to him by galle. on september 18, 1846, leverrier posted a letter to galle with its predicted position.
galle received it on the 23rd, and immediately requested permission for telescope time for the same night from encke. encke was skeptical, but finally relented. galle and one assistant found the new planet less than 1° from its predicted position. this was a major confirmation of the power of celestial mechanics and newton’s law of gravitation. but the discovery of the new planet was not without controversy. an englishman, john couch adams (1819-1892; his middle name was pronounced “cooch” by his native cornish relatives), also claimed discovery of the new planet, also by analyzing perturbations in the orbit of uranus. adams was the son of a poor tenant farmer who got bitten by the astronomy bug as a youngster. at age 16 he observed the return of halley’s comet, and resolved to calculate its orbit. his mother received a timely inheritance that allowed adams to attend cambridge university as a sizar, just like his hero isaac newton. when he graduated in 1843 he was at the top of his class.