and, by measuring the way that galaxies move in clusters, scientists have discovered that dark matter is also distributed among the galaxies in the clusters. since the environment surrounding a galaxy is important in its development, dark matter must play a central role in galaxy evolution as well. indeed, it appears that dark matter makes up most of the matter in the universe. but what is dark matter? what is it made of? we’ll look next at the search for dark matter and the quest to determine its nature. dark matter in the local neighborhood is there dark matter in our own solar system? astronomers have examined the orbits of the known planets and of spacecraft as they journey to the outer planets and beyond. no deviations have been found from the orbits predicted on the basis of the masses of objects already discovered in our solar system and the theory of gravity. we therefore conclude that there is no evidence that there are large amounts of dark matter nearby. astronomers have also looked for evidence of dark matter in the region of the milky way galaxy that lies within a few hundred light-years of the sun. in this vicinity, most of the stars are restricted to a thin disk. it is possible to calculate how much mass the disk must contain in order to keep the stars from wandering far above or below it.
the total matter that must be in the disk is less than twice the amount of luminous matter. this means that no more than half of the mass in the region near the sun can be dark matter. dark matter in and around galaxies in contrast to our local neighborhood near the sun and solar system, there is (as we saw in the milky way galaxy) ample evidence strongly suggesting that about 90% of the mass in the entire galaxy is in the form of a halo of dark matter. in other words, there is apparently about nine times more dark matter than visible matter. astronomers have found some stars in the outer regions of the milky way beyond its bright disk, and these stars are revolving very rapidly around its center. the mass contained in all the stars and all the interstellar matter we can detect in the galaxy does not exert enough gravitational force to explain how those fast-moving stars remain in their orbits and do not fly away. only by having large amounts of unseen matter could the galaxy be holding on to those fast-moving outer stars. the same result is found for other spiral galaxies as well. figure 28.23 is an example of the kinds of observations astronomers are making, for the triangulum galaxy, a member of our local group.
the observed rotation of spiral galaxies like andromeda is usually seen in plots, known as rotation curves, that show velocity versus distance from the galaxy center. such plots suggest that the dark matter is found in a large halo surrounding the luminous parts of each galaxy. the radius of the halos around the milky way and andromeda may be as large as 300,000 light-years, much larger than the visible size of these galaxies. 984 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org figure 28.23 rotation indicates dark matter. we see the milky way’s neighbor, the triangulum galaxy, with a graph that shows the velocity at which stars and clouds of gas orbit the galaxy at different distances from the center (red line). as is true of the milky way, the rotational velocity (or orbital speed) does not decrease with distance from the center, which is what you would expect if an assembly of objects rotates around a common center. a calculation (blue line) based on the total mass visible as stars, gas, and dust predicts that the velocity should be much lower at larger distances from the center.
the discrepancy between the two curves implies the presence of a halo of massive dark matter extending outside the boundary of the luminous matter. this dark matter causes everything in the galaxy to orbit faster than the observed matter alone could explain. (credit background: modification of work by eso) dark matter in clusters of galaxies galaxies in clusters also move around: they orbit the cluster’s center of mass. it is not possible for us to follow a galaxy around its entire orbit because that typically takes about a billion years. it is possible, however, to measure the velocities with which galaxies in a cluster are moving, and then estimate what the total mass in the cluster must be to keep the individual galaxies from flying out of the cluster. the observations indicate that the mass of the galaxies alone cannot keep the cluster together—some other gravity must again be present. the total amount of dark matter in clusters exceeds by more than ten times the luminous mass contained within the galaxies themselves, indicating that dark matter exists between galaxies as well as inside them. there is another approach we can take to measuring the amount of dark matter in clusters of galaxies. as we saw, the universe is expanding, but this expansion is not perfectly uniform, thanks to the interfering hand of gravity.