he then worked for several research institutions and served in the navy during world war ii. after the war, van allen (figure 11.9) was appointed professor of physics at the university of iowa. he and his collaborators began using rockets to explore cosmic radiation in earth’s outer atmosphere. to reach extremely high altitudes, van allen designed a technique in which a balloon lifts and then launches a small rocket (the rocket is nicknamed “the rockoon”). figure 11.9 james van allen (1914–2006). in this 1950s photograph, van allen holds a “rockoon.” (credit: modification of work by frederick w. kent collection, university of iowa archives) over dinner one night in 1950, van allen and several colleagues came up with the idea of the international geophysical year (igy), an opportunity for scientists around the world to coordinate their investigations of the physics of earth, especially research done at high altitudes. in 1955, the united states and the soviet union each committed themselves to launching an earth-orbiting satellite during igy, a competition that began what came to be known as the space race.
the igy (stretched to 18 months) took place between july 1957 and december 1958. the soviet union won the first lap of the race by launching sputnik 1 in october 1957. the us government spurred its scientists and engineers to even greater efforts to get something into space to maintain the country’s prestige. however, the primary us satellite program, vanguard, ran into difficulties: each of its early launches crashed or exploded. simultaneously, a second team of rocket engineers and scientists had quietly been working on a military launch vehicle called jupiter-c. van allen spearheaded the design of the instruments aboard a small satellite that this vehicle would carry. on january 31, 1958, van allen’s explorer 1 became the first us satellite in space. unlike sputnik, explorer 1 was equipped to make scientific measurements of high-energy charged particles above the atmosphere. van allen and his team discovered a belt of highly charged particles surrounding earth, and these belts now bear his name. this first scientific discovery of the space program made van allen’s name known around the world.
van allen and his colleagues continued to measure the magnetic and particle environment around planets voyagers in astronomy 378 11 • the giant planets access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page396_img1.jpeg] with increasingly sophisticated spacecraft, including pioneers 10 and 11, which made exploratory surveys of the environments of jupiter and saturn. some scientists refer to the charged-particle zones around those planets as van allen belts as well. (once, when van allen was giving a lecture at the university of arizona, the graduate students in planetary science asked him if he would leave his belt at the school. it is now proudly displayed as the university’s “van allen belt.”) van allen was a strong supporter of space science and an eloquent senior spokesperson for the american scientific community, warning nasa not to put all its efforts into human spaceflight, but to also use robotic spacecraft as productive tools for space exploration. clouds and atmospheric structure the clouds of jupiter (figure 11.10) are among the most spectacular sights in the solar system, much beloved by makers of science-fiction films. they range in color from white to orange to red to brown, swirling and twisting in a constantly changing kaleidoscope of patterns.
saturn shows similar but much more subdued cloud activity; instead of vivid colors, its clouds have a nearly uniform butterscotch hue (figure 11.11). figure 11.10 jupiter’s colorful clouds. the vibrant colors of the clouds on jupiter present a puzzle to astronomers: given the cool temperatures and the composition of nearly 90% hydrogen, the atmosphere should be colorless. one hypothesis suggests that perhaps colorful hydrogen compounds rise from warm areas. the actual colors are a bit more muted, as shown in figure 11.2. (credit: modification of work by voyager project, jpl, and nasa) different gases freeze at different temperatures. at the temperatures and pressures of the upper atmospheres of jupiter and saturn, methane remains a gas, but ammonia can condense and freeze. (similarly, water vapor condenses high in earth’s atmosphere to produce clouds of ice crystals.) the primary clouds that we see around these planets, whether from a spacecraft or through a telescope, are composed of frozen ammonia crystals. the ammonia clouds mark the upper edge of the planets’ tropospheres; above that is the stratosphere, the coldest part of the atmosphere.