compare this answer to the age of the universe, which is approximately 14 billion years . d. what does this tell you about how frequently neutrinos interact with matter? 16 • exercises 571 572 16 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 17.1 star colors. this long time exposure shows the colors of the stars. the circular motion of the stars across the image is provided by earth’s rotation. the various colors of the stars are caused by their different temperatures. (credit: modification of work by eso/a.santerne) chapter outline 17.1 the brightness of stars 17.2 colors of stars 17.3 the spectra of stars (and brown dwarfs) 17.4 using spectra to measure stellar radius, composition, and motion thinking ahead everything we know about stars—how they are born, what they are made of, how far away they are, how long they live, and how they will die—we learn by decoding the messages contained in the light and radiation that reaches earth. what questions should we ask, and how do we find the answers? we can begin our voyage to the stars by looking at the night sky.
it is obvious that stars do not all appear equally bright, nor are they all the same color. to understand the stars, we must first determine their basic properties, such as what their temperatures are, how much material they contain (their masses), and how much energy they produce. since our sun is a star, of course the same techniques, including spectroscopy, used to study the sun can be used to find out what stars are like. as we learn more about the stars, we will use these characteristics to begin assembling clues to the main problems we are interested in solving: how do stars form? how long do they survive? what is their ultimate fate? 17.1 the brightness of stars learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: explain the difference between luminosity and apparent brightness understand how astronomers specify brightness with magnitudes analyzing starlight 17 [image: astronomy_openstax_page591_img1.jpeg] luminosity perhaps the most important characteristic of a star is its luminosity—the total amount of energy at all wavelengths that it emits per second. earlier, we saw that the sun puts out a tremendous amount of energy every second.
(and there are stars far more luminous than the sun out there.) to make the comparison among stars easy, astronomers express the luminosity of other stars in terms of the sun’s luminosity. for example, the luminosity of sirius is about 25 times that of the sun. we use the symbol lsun to denote the sun’s luminosity; hence, that of sirius can be written as 25 lsun. in a later chapter, we will see that if we can measure how much energy a star emits and we also know its mass, then we can calculate how long it can continue to shine before it exhausts its nuclear energy and begins to die. apparent brightness astronomers are careful to distinguish between the luminosity of the star (the total energy output) and the amount of energy that happens to reach our eyes or a telescope on earth. stars are democratic in how they produce radiation; they emit the same amount of energy in every direction in space. consequently, only a minuscule fraction of the energy given off by a star actually reaches an observer on earth. we call the amount of a star’s energy that reaches a given area (say, one square meter) each second here on earth its apparent brightness.
if you look at the night sky, you see a wide range of apparent brightnesses among the stars. most stars, in fact, are so dim that you need a telescope to detect them. if all stars were the same luminosity—if they were like standard bulbs with the same light output—we could use the difference in their apparent brightnesses to tell us something we very much want to know: how far away they are. imagine you are in a big concert hall or ballroom that is dark except for a few dozen 25-watt bulbs placed in fixtures around the walls. since they are all 25-watt bulbs, their luminosity (energy output) is the same. but from where you are standing in one corner, they do not have the same apparent brightness. those close to you appear brighter (more of their light reaches your eye), whereas those far away appear dimmer (their light has spread out more before reaching you). in this way, you can tell which bulbs are closest to you. in the same way, if all the stars had the same luminosity, we could immediately infer that the brightest- appearing stars were close by and the dimmest-appearing ones were far away.