42 2 • observing the sky: the birth of astronomy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page60_img1.jpeg] this website about objects in the sky (https://openstax.org/l/30heavensabove) allows users to construct a detailed sky map showing the location and information about the sun, moon, planets, stars, constellations, and even satellites orbiting earth. begin by setting your observing location using the option in the menu in the upper right corner of the screen. an excellent website called figures in the sky (https://openstax.org/l/ 30constel) shows the constellation figures imagined by cultures around the world. 2.2 ancient astronomy learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: let us now look briefly back into history. much of modern western civilization is derived in one way or another from the ideas of the ancient greeks and romans, and this is true in astronomy as well. however, many other ancient cultures also developed sophisticated systems for observing and interpreting the sky. astronomy around the world ancient babylonian, assyrian, and egyptian astronomers knew the approximate length of the year.
the egyptians of 3000 years ago, for example, adopted a calendar based on a 365-day year. they kept careful track of the rising time of the bright star sirius in the predawn sky, which has a yearly cycle that corresponded with the flooding of the nile river. the chinese also had a working calendar; they determined the length of the year at about the same time as the egyptians. the chinese also recorded comets, bright meteors, and dark spots on the sun. (many types of astronomical objects were introduced in science and the universe: a brief tour. if you are not familiar with terms like comets and meteors, you may want to review that chapter.) later, chinese astronomers kept careful records of “guest stars”—those that are normally too faint to see but suddenly flare up to become visible to the unaided eye for a few weeks or months. we still use some of these records in studying stars that exploded a long time ago. the mayan culture in mexico and central america developed a sophisticated calendar based on the planet venus, and they made astronomical observations from sites dedicated to this purpose a thousand years ago.
the polynesians learned to navigate by the stars over hundreds of kilometers of open ocean—a skill that enabled them to colonize new islands far away from where they began. in britain, before the widespread use of writing, ancient people used stones to keep track of the motions of the sun and moon. we still find some of the great stone circles they built for this purpose, dating from as far back as 2800 bce. the best known of these is stonehenge, which is discussed in earth, moon, and sky.1 early greek and roman cosmology our concept of the cosmos—its basic structure and origin—is called cosmology, a word with greek roots. before the invention of telescopes, humans had to depend on the simple evidence of their senses for a picture link to learning describe early examples of astronomy around the world explain how greek astronomers were able to deduce that earth is spherical explain how greek astronomers were able to calculate earth’s size describe the motion of earth called precession describe ptolemy’s geocentric system of planetary motion 1 for resources providing more information about the astronomy of diverse cultures around the world, please see http://bit.ly/ astrocultures (http://bit.ly/astrocultures).
2.2 • ancient astronomy 43 of the universe. the ancients developed cosmologies that combined their direct view of the heavens with a rich variety of philosophical and religious symbolism. at least 2000 years before columbus, educated people in the eastern mediterranean region knew earth was round. belief in a spherical earth may have stemmed from the time of pythagoras, a philosopher and mathematician who lived 2500 years ago. he believed circles and spheres to be “perfect forms” and suggested that earth should therefore be a sphere. as evidence that the gods liked spheres, the greeks cited the fact that the moon is a sphere, using evidence we describe later. the writings of aristotle (384–322 bce), the tutor of alexander the great, summarize many of the ideas of his day. they describe how the progression of the moon’s phases—its apparent changing shape—results from our seeing different portions of the moon’s sunlit hemisphere as the month goes by (see earth, moon, and sky). aristotle also knew that the sun has to be farther away from earth than is the moon because occasionally the moon passed exactly between earth and the sun and hid the sun temporarily from view. we call this a solar eclipse.