based on kepler’s second law, does the planet spend more time closer or farther from the star? explain. 21 • exercises 739 figuring for yourself 22. when astronomers found the first giant planets with orbits of only a few days, they did not know whether those planets were gaseous and liquid like jupiter or rocky like mercury. the observations of hd 209458 settled this question because observations of the transit of the star by this planet made it possible to determine the radius of the planet. use the data given in the text to estimate the density of this planet, and then use that information to explain why it must be a gas giant. 23. an exoplanetary system has two known planets. planet x orbits in 290 days and planet y orbits in 145 days. which planet is closest to its host star? if the star has the same mass as the sun, what is the semi- major axis of the orbits for planets x and y? 24. kepler’s third law says that the orbital period (in years) is proportional to the square root of the cube of the mean distance (in au) from the sun .
for mean distances from 0.1 to 32 au, calculate and plot a curve showing the expected keplerian period. for each planet in our solar system, look up the mean distance from the sun in au and the orbital period in years and overplot these data on the theoretical keplerian curve. 25. calculate the transit depth for an m dwarf star that is 0.3 times the radius of the sun with a gas giant planet the size of jupiter. 26. if a transit depth of 0.00001 can be detected with the kepler spacecraft, what is the smallest planet that could be detected around a 0.3 rsun m dwarf star? 27. what fraction of gas giant planets seems to have inflated radii? 740 21 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 22.1 ant nebula. during the later phases of stellar evolution, stars expel some of their mass, which returns to the interstellar medium to form new stars. this hubble space telescope image shows a star losing mass. known as menzel 3, or the ant nebula, this beautiful region of expelled gas is about 3000 light-years away from the sun.
we see a central star that has ejected mass preferentially in two opposite directions. the object is about 1.6 light-years long. the image is color coded—red corresponds to an emission line of sulfur, green to nitrogen, blue to hydrogen, and blue/violet to oxygen. (credit: modification of work by nasa, esa and the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura)) chapter outline 22.1 evolution from the main sequence to red giants 22.2 star clusters 22.3 checking out the theory 22.4 further evolution of stars 22.5 the evolution of more massive stars thinking ahead the sun and other stars cannot last forever. eventually they will exhaust their nuclear fuel and cease to shine. but how do they change during their long lifetimes? and what do these changes mean for the future of earth? we now turn from the birth of stars to the rest of their life stories. this is not an easy task since stars live much longer than astronomers. thus, we cannot hope to see the life story of any single star unfold before our eyes or telescopes. to learn about their lives, we must survey as many of the stellar inhabitants of the galaxy as possible.
with thoroughness and a little luck, we can catch at least a few of them in each stage of their lives. as you’ve learned, stars have many different characteristics, with the differences sometimes resulting from their different masses, temperatures, and luminosities, and at other times derived from changes that occur as they age. through a combination of observation and theory, we can use these differences to piece together the life story of a star. stars from adolescence to old age 22 [image: astronomy_openstax_page759_img1.jpeg] 22.1 evolution from the main sequence to red giants learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: one of the best ways to get a “snapshot” of a group of stars is by plotting their properties on an h–r diagram. we have already used the h–r diagram to follow the evolution of protostars up to the time they reach the main sequence. now we’ll see what happens next. once a star has reached the main-sequence stage of its life, it derives its energy almost entirely from the conversion of hydrogen to helium via the process of nuclear fusion in its core (see the sun: a nuclear powerhouse).