since it seems very unlikely that we would have caught such a complex cluster link to learning 880 25 • the milky way galaxy access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page898_img1.jpeg] of objects just before it collapsed, the evidence for a supermassive black hole at the center of the galaxy is convincing indeed. finding the source where did our galactic black hole come from? the origin of supermassive black holes in galaxies like ours is currently an active field of research. one possibility is that a large cloud of gas near the center of the milky way collapsed directly to form a black hole. since we find large black holes at the centers of most other large galaxies (see active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes)—even ones that are very young—this collapse probably would have taken place when the milky way was just beginning to take shape. the initial mass of this black hole might have been only a few tens of solar masses. another way it could have started is that a massive star might have exploded to leave behind a seed black hole, or a dense cluster of stars might have collapsed into a black hole.
once a black hole exists at the center of a galaxy, it can grow over the next several billion years by devouring nearby stars and gas clouds in the crowded central regions. it can also grow by merging with other black holes. it appears that the monster black hole at the center of our galaxy is not finished “eating.” at the present time, we observe clouds of gas and dust falling into the galactic center at the rate of about 1 msun per thousand years. stars are also on the black hole’s menu. the density of stars near the galactic center is high enough that we would expect a star to pass near the black hole and be swallowed by it every ten thousand years or so. as this happens, some of the energy of infall is released as radiation. as a result, the center of the galaxy might flare up and even briefly outshine all the stars in the milky way. other objects might also venture too close to the black hole and be pulled in. how great a flare we observe would depend on the mass of the object falling in. in 2013, the chandra x-ray satellite detected a flare from the center of our galaxy that was 400 times brighter than the usual output from sagittarius a*.
a year later, a second flare, only half as bright, was also detected. this is much less energy than swallowing a whole star would produce. there are two theories to account for the flares. first, an asteroid might have ventured too close to the black hole and been heated to a very high temperature before being swallowed up. alternatively, the flares might have involved interactions of the magnetic fields near the galactic center in a process similar to the one described for solar flares (see the sun: a garden-variety star). astronomers continue to monitor the galactic center area for flares or other activity. although the monster in the center of the galaxy is not close enough to us to represent any danger, we still want to keep our eyes on it. andrea ghez a lover of puzzles, andrea ghez has been pursuing one of the greatest mysteries in astronomy: what strange entity lurks within the center of our milky way galaxy? voyagers in astronomy 25.4 • the center of the galaxy 881 figure 25.18 andrea ghez. research by ghez and her team has helped shape our understanding of supermassive black holes. (credit: modification of work by john d.
and catherine t. macarthur foundation) as a child living in chicago during the late 1960s, andrea ghez (figure 25.18) was fascinated by the apollo moon landings. but she was also drawn to ballet and to solving all sorts of puzzles. by high school, she had lost the ballet bug in favor of competing in field hockey, playing the flute, and digging deeper into academics. her undergraduate years at mit were punctuated by a number of changes in her major—from mathematics to chemistry, mechanical engineering, aerospace engineering, and finally physics—where she felt her options were most open. as a physics major, she became involved in astronomical research under the guidance of one of her instructors. once she got to do some actual observing at kitt peak national observatory in arizona, and later at cerro tololo inter-american observatory in chile, ghez had found her calling. pursuing her graduate studies at caltech, she stuck with physics but oriented her efforts toward observational astrophysics, an area where caltech had access to cutting-edge facilities.