jupiter’s average density is 1.3 g/cm3, much lower than that of any of the terrestrial planets. (recall that water has a density of 1 g/cm3.) jupiter’s material is spread out over a volume so large that about 1,300 earths could fit within it. saturn’s mass is 95 times that of earth, and its average density is only 0.7 g/cm3—the lowest of any planet. since this is less than the density of water, saturn would be light enough to float. uranus and neptune each have a mass about 15 times that of earth and, hence, are only 5% as massive as jupiter. their densities of 1.3 g/cm3 and 1.6 g/cm3, respectively, are much higher than that of saturn. this is one piece of evidence that tells us that their composition must differ fundamentally from the gas giants. when astronomers began to discover other planetary systems (exoplanets), we found that planets the size of uranus and neptune are common, and that there are even more exoplanets intermediate in size between earth and these ice giants, a type of planet not found in our solar system.
appearance and rotation when we look at the planets, we see only their atmospheres, composed primarily of hydrogen and helium gas (see figure 11.1). the uppermost clouds of jupiter and saturn, the part we see when looking down at these planets from above, are composed of ammonia crystals. on neptune, the upper clouds are made of methane. on uranus, we see no obvious cloud layer at all, but only a deep and featureless haze. seen through a telescope, jupiter is a colorful and dynamic planet. distinct details in its cloud patterns allow us to determine the rotation rate of its atmosphere at the cloud level, although such atmosphere rotation may have little to do with the spin of the underlying planet. much more fundamental is the rotation of the mantle and core; these can be determined by periodic variations in radio waves coming from jupiter, which are controlled by its magnetic field. since the magnetic field (which we will discuss below) originates deep inside the planet, it shares the rotation of the interior. the rotation period we measure in this way is 9 hours 56 minutes, which gives jupiter the shortest “day” of any planet.
in the same way, we can measure that the underlying rotation period of saturn is 10 hours 40 minutes. uranus and neptune have slightly longer rotation periods of about 17 hours, also determined from the rotation of their magnetic fields. a brief video made from hubble space telescope photos shows the rotation of jupiter link to learning 372 11 • the giant planets access for free at openstax.org (https://openstax.org/l/30hstjuprot) with its many atmospheric features. remember that earth and mars have seasons because their spin axes, instead of “standing up straight,” are tilted relative to the orbital plane of the solar system. this means that as earth revolves around the sun, sometimes one hemisphere and sometimes the other “leans into” the sun. what are the seasons like for the giant planets? the spin axis of jupiter is tilted by only 3°, so there are no seasons to speak of. saturn, however, does have seasons, since its spin axis is inclined at 27° to the perpendicular to its orbit. neptune has about the same tilt as saturn (29°); therefore, it experiences similar seasons (only more slowly).
the strangest seasons of all are on uranus, which has a spin axis tilted by 98° with respect to the north direction. practically speaking, we can say that uranus orbits on its side, and its ring and moon system follow along, orbiting about uranus’ equator (figure 11.5). figure 11.5 infrared image of uranus. the infrared camera on the hubble space telescope took these false-color images of the planet uranus, its ring system, and moons in 1997. the south pole of the planet (marked with a “+” on the right image) faces the sun; its green color shows a strong local haze. the two images were taken 90 minutes apart, and during that time the five reddish clouds can be seen to rotate around the parallel to the equator. the rings (which are very faint in the visible light, but prominent in infrared) and eight moons can be seen around the equator. this was the “bull’s eye” arrangement that voyager saw as it approached uranus in 1986.