there are believed to be six types: up, down, top, bottom, charm, and strange. this is the smallest particle that we have detected. quark epoch from 10-35 to 10-4 seconds after the big bang. the strong nuclear force follows gravity and they are both separated from the other two fundamental forces. this is followed by the weak nuclear force separating from the electromagnetic force as well, leaving the four separate fundamental forces we know today. the energy level has dropped to the point where quarks can form and are not destroyed by high-energy photons. quasars very early active galaxies. radiant the point in the sky that all meteor trails seem to have originated from in a meteor shower. radiation the release of energy by some rare heavy elements. radiation dominated in the early universe, matter could not form. at that time, there was much more energy than matter. radiation era the period when the universe was radiation dominated. it includes these epochs: planck, gut, quark, lepton, and nuclear. radiation zone the region of the sun’s interior outside the core. radio galaxy an active galaxy that is shooting jets of material into nearby space resulting in glowing radio lobes.
radio telescope a telescope designed to detect electromagnetic radiation in the radio part of the spectrum. radio waves the wavelengths at the long end of the spectrum. rayleigh scattering the scattering of blue light in earth’s atmosphere. this is why the sky is blue. red giants large red stars in the final stages of their lives. red shift when an object is moving away from you, the lines in the astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 410 light being emitted are moved in the red direction (longer wavelengths). red shift surveys surveys of the universe studying the red shift of galaxies in a specific area to determine the distribution of galaxies. reddening dust and gas think enough to cause the scattering of blue light from distance stars before it can reach earth. this results in these stars appearing to be redder than they really are. reflection nebulae (singular is nebula) clouds of dust and gas that glow in the blue from photons that are scattered as they pass through. this is due to rayleigh scattering and is blue for the same reason that the sky on earth is blue. reflector a telescope that uses primarily mirrors to focus light. refractor a telescope that uses primarily lenses to focus light.
regolith regolith – the dust on the surface of the moon that is the result of continuous impacts of meteors. retrograde motion the apparent backwards movement of superior planets through the sky as seen from earth. right ascension right ascension - imaginary lines in the sky that go from celestial north to celestial south. the sky is broken up into 24 major pieces (hours) and each of these have 60 minutes, and each minute has 60 seconds. rings all of the jovian planets have rings. saturn’s rings are spectacular and are the only ones visible from earth. roche limit the distance from a planet within which dust will not form into a moon due to the gravitational stress. roche lobes the theoretical limiting distance from a star beyond which its matter will flow to its binary companion. rotation curve the speed of rotation as a function of distance from the galaxy’s core. rotational flattening an object that is a sphere flattens somewhat when it is rotated. roygbv the colors of light in the visible part of the spectrum, from longest wavelength to shortest wavelength: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and violet. r-process the rapid neutron capture process. neutrons are captured by atoms at a very high rate.
atoms created do not have to be stable for a very long time. this process created atoms up to uranium. runaway greenhouse effect runaway greenhouse effect – the very high atmospheric temperatures found on venus due to the large amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. runoff channels extensive networks of channels showing movement of water. scarp scarp – large cliff on mercury caused by the cooling of the astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 411 planet and the surface folding. schwarzschild radius also known as the event horizon. this is the distance from the black hole at which the escape velocity is equal to the speed of light. scientific method an approach to solving mysteries. consists of three parts: observation, theory, and prediction. scientific theory a proposal to describe why things behave the way they do. since we cannot ever try all of the possibilities, we can never prove it. only one failure can disprove it. it must be continually tested. seeing in astronomy, the stability of the air. it directly affects your ability to focus an object in a telescope. seismic waves vibrations that travel through the earth and can be measured by surface detectors. they can be used to determine the earth’s internal structure.