as the star shrinks, its surface area gets smaller, and so its total luminosity decreases. the rapid contraction stops only when the protostar becomes dense and opaque enough to trap the heat released by gravitational contraction. when the star begins to retain its heat, the contraction becomes much slower, and changes inside the contracting star keep the luminosity of stars like our sun roughly constant. the surface temperatures start to build up, and the star “moves” to the left in the h–r diagram. stars first become visible only after the stellar wind described earlier clears away the surrounding dust and gas. this can happen during the rapid- contraction phase for low-mass stars, but high-mass stars remain shrouded in dust until they end their early phase of gravitational contraction (see the dashed line in figure 21.12). to help you keep track of the various stages that stars go through in their lives, it can be useful to compare the development of a star to that of a human being.
(clearly, you will not find an exact correspondence, but thinking through the stages in human terms may help you remember some of the ideas we are trying to emphasize.) protostars might be compared to human embryos—as yet unable to sustain themselves but drawing resources from their environment as they grow. just as the birth of a child is the moment it is called upon to produce its own energy (through eating and breathing), so astronomers say that a star is born when it is able to sustain itself through nuclear reactions (by making its own energy.) when the star’s central temperature becomes high enough (about 12 million k) to fuse hydrogen into helium, we say that the star has reached the main sequence (a concept introduced in the stars: a celestial census). it is now a full-fledged star, more or less in equilibrium, and its rate of change slows dramatically. only the gradual depletion of hydrogen as it is transformed into helium in the core slowly changes the star’s properties. the mass of a star determines exactly where it falls on the main sequence. as figure 21.12 shows, massive stars on the main sequence have high temperatures and high luminosities. low-mass stars have low temperatures and low luminosities.
objects of extremely low mass never achieve high-enough central temperatures to ignite nuclear reactions. the lower end of the main sequence stops where stars have a mass just barely great enough to sustain nuclear reactions at a sufficient rate to stop gravitational contraction. this critical mass is calculated to be about 0.075 times the mass of the sun. as we discussed in the chapter on analyzing starlight, objects below this critical mass are called either brown dwarfs or planets. at the other extreme, the upper end of the main sequence terminates at the point where the energy radiated by the newly forming massive star becomes so great that it halts the accretion of additional matter. the upper limit of stellar mass is between 100 and 200 solar masses. evolutionary timescales how long it takes a star to form depends on its mass. the numbers that label the points on each track in figure 21.12 are the times, in years, required for the embryo stars to reach the stages we have been discussing. stars of masses much higher than the sun’s reach the main sequence in a few thousand to a million years. the sun required millions of years before it was born. tens of millions of years are required for stars of lower mass to evolve to the lower main sequence.
(we will see that this turns out to be a general principle: massive stars go through all stages of evolution faster than low-mass stars do.) we will take up the subsequent stages in the life of a star in stars from adolescence to old age, examining what happens after stars arrive in the main sequence and begin a “prolonged adolescence” and “adulthood” of fusing hydrogen to form helium. but now we want to examine the connection between the formation of stars and planets. 21.2 • the h–r diagram and the study of stellar evolution 711 21.3 evidence that planets form around other stars learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: having developed on a planet and finding it essential to our existence, we have a special interest in how planets fit into the story of star formation. yet planets outside the solar system are extremely difficult to detect. recall that we see planets in our own system only because they reflect sunlight and are close by. when we look to the other stars, we find that the amount of light a planet reflects is a depressingly tiny fraction of the light its star gives off.