it’s not so easy to see this rule in action in the everyday world because of the many forces acting on a body at any one time. one important force is friction, which generally slows things down. if you roll a ball along the sidewalk, it eventually comes to a stop because the sidewalk exerts a rubbing force on the ball. but in the space between the stars, where there is so little matter that friction is insignificant, objects can in fact continue to move (to coast) indefinitely. the momentum of a body can change only under the action of an outside influence. newton’s second law expresses force in terms of its ability to change momentum with time. a force (a push or a pull) has both size and direction. when a force is applied to a body, the momentum changes in the direction of the applied force. this means that a force is required to change either the speed or the direction of a body, or both—that is, to start it moving, to speed it up, to slow it down, to stop it, or to change its direction. as you learned in observing the sky: the birth of astronomy, the rate of change in an object’s velocity is called acceleration.
newton showed that the acceleration of a body was proportional to the force being applied to it. suppose that after a long period of reading, you push an astronomy book away from you on a long, smooth table. (we use a smooth table so we can ignore friction.) if you push the book steadily, it will continue to speed up as long as you are pushing it. the harder you push the book, the larger its acceleration will be. how much a force will accelerate an object is also determined by the object’s mass. if you kept pushing a pen with the same force with which you pushed the textbook, the pen—having less mass—would be accelerated to a greater speed. newton’s third law is perhaps the most profound of the rules he discovered. basically, it is a generalization of the first law, but it also gives us a way to define mass. if we consider a system of two or more objects isolated from outside influences, newton’s first law says that the total momentum of the objects should remain constant. therefore, any change of momentum within the system must be balanced by another change that is equal and opposite so that the momentum of the entire system is not changed.
this means that forces in nature do not occur alone: we find that in each situation there is always a pair of forces that are equal to and opposite each other. if a force is exerted on an object, it must be exerted by something else, and the object will exert an equal and opposite force back on that something. we can look at a simple example to demonstrate this. suppose that a daredevil astronomy student—and avid skateboarder—wants to jump from his second-story dorm window onto his board below (we don’t recommend trying this!). the force pulling him down after jumping (as we will see in the next section) is the force of gravity between him and earth. both he and earth must experience the same total change of momentum because of the influence of these mutual forces. so, both the student and earth are accelerated by each other’s pull. however, the student does much more of the moving. because earth has enormously greater mass, it can experience the same change of momentum by accelerating only a very small amount. things fall toward earth all the time, but the acceleration of our planet as a result is far too small to be measured.
a more obvious example of the mutual nature of forces between objects is familiar to all who have batted a 3.2 • newton’s great synthesis 77 baseball. the recoil you feel as you swing your bat shows that the ball exerts a force on it during the impact, just as the bat does on the ball. similarly, when a rifle you are bracing on your shoulder is discharged, the force pushing the bullet out of the muzzle is equal to the force pushing backward upon the gun and your shoulder. this is the principle behind jet engines and rockets: the force that discharges the exhaust gases from the rear of the rocket is accompanied by the force that pushes the rocket forward. the exhaust gases need not push against air or earth; a rocket actually operates best in a vacuum (figure 3.7). figure 3.7 demonstrating newton’s third law. the u.s. space shuttle (here launching discovery), powered by three fuel engines burning liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen, with two solid fuel boosters, demonstrates newton’s third law.