it turns out that when the two objects appear close enough together in the sky, the mass closer to us can bend the light from farther away. with just the right alignment, the image of the more distant object also becomes significantly brighter. by looking for the temporary brightening that occurs when a dark matter object in our own galaxy moves across the path traveled by light from stars in the magellanic clouds, astronomers have now shown that the dark matter cannot be made up of a lot of small objects with masses between one-millionth and one-tenth the mass of the sun. what’s left? one possibility is that the dark matter is composed of exotic subatomic particles of a type not yet detected on earth. very sophisticated (and difficult) experiments are now under way to look for such particles. stay tuned to see whether anything like that turns up. we should add that the problem of dark matter is by no means confined to the milky way. observations show that dark matter must also be present in other galaxies (whose outer regions also orbit too fast “for their own good”—they also have flat rotation curves).
as we will see, dark matter even exists in great clusters of galaxies whose members are now known to move around under the influence of far more gravity than can be accounted for by luminous matter alone. stop a moment and consider how astounding the conclusion we have reached really is. perhaps as much as 95% of the mass in our galaxy (and many other galaxies) is not only invisible, but we do not even know what it is made of. the stars and raw material we can observe may be merely the tip of the cosmic iceberg; underlying it all may be other matter, perhaps familiar, perhaps startlingly new. understanding the nature of this dark matter is one of the great challenges of astronomy today; you will learn more about this in the challenge of dark matter. you can use the dark matter simulator (https://openstax.org/l/30darkmattsim) to explore the distribution of invisible dark matter in our galaxy. use the controls in the upper right to change the amount of dark matter at different distances from the center of the galaxy. you can then compare the orbital speeds in your simulated galaxy with orbital speeds measured in the milky way.
link to learning 876 25 • the milky way galaxy access for free at openstax.org 25.4 the center of the galaxy learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: at the beginning of this chapter, we hinted that the core of our galaxy contains a large concentration of mass. in fact, we now have evidence that the very center contains a black hole with a mass equivalent to 4.6 million suns and that all this mass fits within a sphere that has less than the diameter of mercury’s orbit. such monster black holes are called supermassive black holes by astronomers, to indicate that the mass they contain is far greater than that of the typical black hole created by the death of a single star. it is amazing that we have very convincing evidence that this black hole really does exist. after all, recall from the chapter on black holes and curved spacetime that we cannot see a black hole directly because by definition it radiates no energy. and we cannot even see into the center of the galaxy in visible light because of absorption by the interstellar dust that lies between us and the galactic center.
light from the central region of the galaxy is dimmed by a factor of a trillion (1012) by all this dust. fortunately, we are not so blind at other wavelengths. infrared and radio radiation, which have long wavelengths compared to the sizes of the interstellar dust grains, flow unimpeded past the dust particles and so reach our telescopes with hardly any dimming. in fact, the very bright radio source in the nucleus of the galaxy, now known as sagittarius a* (pronounced “sagittarius a-star” and abbreviated sgr a*), was the first cosmic radio source astronomers discovered. a journey toward the center let’s take a voyage to the mysterious heart of our galaxy and see what’s there. figure 25.14 is a radio image of a region about 1500 light-years across, centered on sagittarius a, a bright radio source that contains the smaller sagittarius a*. much of the radio emission comes from hot gas heated either by clusters of hot stars (the stars themselves do not produce radio emission and can’t be seen in the image) or by supernova blast waves. most of the hollow circles visible on the radio image are supernova remnants.