in many places, the surface of europa looks just as we would expect for a thick layer of ice that was broken up into giant icebergs and ice floes and then refrozen in place. when the ice breaks, water or slush from below may be able to seep up through the cracks and make the ridges and multiple-line features we observe. many episodes of ice cracking, shifting, rotating, and refreezing are required to explain the complexity we see. the icy crust might vary in thickness from a kilometer or so up to 20 kilometers. further confirmation that a liquid ocean exists below the 12.2 • the galilean moons of jupiter 399 [image: astronomy_openstax_page417_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page417_img2.jpeg] ice comes from measurements of the small magnetic field induced by europa’s interactions with the magnetosphere of jupiter. the “magnetic signature” of europa is that of a liquid water ocean, not one of ice or rock. data from the juno spacecraft in 2024 complicate this picture, however, indicating that the thickness of the europa ice crust could be as much as twice the value deduced from earlier observations.
while this does not change our general picture of europa’s internal structure, a thicker ice crust suggests that the deep ocean may be more difficult to access than we previously thought. if europa really has a large ocean of liquid water under its ice, then it may be the only place in the solar system, other than earth, with really large amounts of liquid water.1 to remain liquid, this ocean must be warmed by heat escaping from the interior of europa. hot (or at least warm) springs might be active there, analogous to those we have discovered in the deep oceans of earth. the necessary internal heat is generated by tidal heating (see the discussion later in this chapter). a short film (https://openstax.org/l/30europa) with planetary scientist kevin hand explains why europa is so interesting for future exploration. or listen to this more in-depth talk (https://openstax.org/l/30europa2) on europa. what makes the idea of an ocean with warm springs exciting is the discovery in earth’s oceans of large ecosystems clustered around deep ocean hot springs. such life derives all its energy from the mineral-laden water and thrives independent of the sunlight shining on earth’s surface.
is it possible that similar ecosystems could exist today under the ice of europa? many scientists now think that europa is the most likely place beyond earth to find life in the solar system. in response, nasa is launching a europa mission to characterize its liquid ocean and its ice crust, and to identify locations where material from inside has risen to the surface. such interior material might reveal direct evidence for microbial life. this “europa clipper” mission will not orbit europa, where the intense energetic particles from jupiter’s magnetosphere would quickly destroy its electronics, but instead will swoop in for brief close flybys. it was successfully launched in october 2024, with arrival in the jupiter system scheduled for the year 2030. lo, a volcanic moon io, the innermost of jupiter’s galilean moons, is in many ways a close twin of our moon, with nearly the same size and density. we might therefore expect it to have experienced a similar history. its appearance, as photographed from space, tells us another story, however (figure 12.7). instead of being a dead cratered world, io turns out to have the highest level of volcanism in the solar system, greatly exceeding that of earth.
link to learning 1 ganymede and saturn’s moon enceladus may have smaller amounts of liquid water under their surfaces. 400 12 • rings, moons, and pluto access for free at openstax.org figure 12.7 two sides of io. this composite image shows both sides of the volcanically active moon io. the orange deposits are sulfur snow; the white is sulfur dioxide. (carl sagan once quipped that io looks as if it desperately needs a shot of penicillin.) (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl/usgs) io’s active volcanism was discovered by the voyager spacecraft. eight volcanoes were seen erupting when voyager 1 passed in march 1979, and six of these were still active four months later when voyager 2 passed. with the improved instruments carried by the galileo spacecraft, more than 50 eruptions were found during 1997 alone. many of the eruptions produce graceful plumes that extend hundreds of kilometers out into space (figure 12.8). figure 12.8 volcanic eruptions on io.