in fact, it is likely that oxygen-producing photosynthesis emerged considerably earlier. some forms of chemical evidence contained in ancient rocks, such as the solid, layered rock formations known as stromatolites, are thought to be the fossils of oxygen-producing photosynthetic bacteria in rocks that are almost 3.5 billion years old (figure 30.5). it is generally thought that a simpler form of photosynthesis that does not produce oxygen (and is still used by some bacteria today) probably preceded oxygen-producing photosynthesis, and there is strong fossil evidence that one or the other type of photosynthesis was functioning on earth at least as far back as 3.4 billion years ago. figure 30.5 stromatolites preserve the earliest physical representation of life on earth. in their reach for sunlight, the single- celled microbes formed mats that trapped sediments in the water above them. such trapped sediments fell and formed layers on top of the mats. the microbes then climbed atop the sediment layers and trapped more sediment. what is found in the rock record are (a) the solidified, curved sedimentary layers that are signatures of biological activity.
the earliest known stromatolite is 3.47 billion years old and is found in western australia. (b) this more recent example is in lake thetis, also in western australia. (credit a: modification of work by james st. john; credit b: modification of work by ruth ellison) the free oxygen produced by photosynthesis began accumulating in our atmosphere about 2.4 billion years ago. the interaction of sunlight with oxygen can produce ozone (which has three atoms of oxygen per molecule, as compared to the two atoms per molecule in the oxygen we breathe), which accumulated in a 30.2 • astrobiology 1061 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1079_img1.jpeg] layer high in earth’s atmosphere. as it does on earth today, this ozone provided protection from the sun’s damaging ultraviolet radiation. this allowed life to colonize the landmasses of our planet instead of remaining only in the ocean. the rise in oxygen levels was deadly to some microbes because, as a highly reactive chemical, it can irreversibly damage some of the biomolecules that early life had developed in the absence of oxygen.
for other microbes, it was a boon: combining oxygen with organic matter or other reduced chemicals generates a lot of energy—you can see this when a log burns, for example—and many forms of life adopted this way of living. this new energy source made possible a great proliferation of organisms, which continued to evolve in an oxygen-rich environment. the details of that evolution are properly the subject of biology courses, but the process of evolution by natural selection (survival of the fittest) provides a clear explanation for the development of earth’s remarkable variety of life-forms. it does not, however, directly solve the mystery of life’s earliest beginnings. we hypothesize that life will arise whenever conditions are appropriate, but this hypothesis is just another form of the copernican principle. we now have the potential to address this hypothesis with observations. if a second example of life is found in our solar system or a nearby star, it would imply that life emerges commonly enough that the universe is likely filled with biology. to make such observations, however, we must first decide where to focus our search. just how did life arise in the first place? and could it have happened with a different type of chemistry?
watch the 15-minute video making matter come alive (https://openstax.org/l/30makmattcomali) in which a chemistry expert explores some answers to these questions, from a 2011 ted talk. habitable environments among the staggering number of objects in our solar system, galaxy, and universe, some may have conditions suitable for life, while others do not. understanding what conditions and features make a habitable environment—an environment capable of hosting life—is important both for understanding how widespread habitable environments may be in the universe and for focusing a search for life beyond earth. here, we discuss habitability from the perspective of the life we know. we will explore the basic requirements of life and, in the following section, consider the full range of environmental conditions on earth where life is found. while we can’t entirely rule out the possibility that other life-forms might have biochemistry based on alternatives to carbon and liquid water, such life “as we don’t know it” is still completely speculative. in our discussion here, we are focusing on habitability for life that is chemically similar to that on earth. life requires a solvent (a liquid in which chemicals can dissolve) that enables the construction of biomolecules and the interactions between them.