but these figures refer only to the inner, conspicuous parts of galaxies (figure 26.10). in the milky way galaxy and above, we discussed the evidence for dark matter in the outer regions of our own galaxy, extending much farther from the galactic center than do the bright stars and gas. recent measurements of the rotation speeds of the outer parts of nearby galaxies, such as the andromeda galaxy we discussed earlier, suggest that they too have extended distributions of dark matter around the visible disk of stars and dust. this largely invisible matter adds to the mass of the galaxy while contributing nothing to its luminosity, thus increasing the mass- to-light ratio. if dark invisible matter is present in a galaxy, its mass-to-light ratio can be as high as 100. the two different mass-to-light ratios measured for various types of galaxies are given in table 26.1. 908 26 • galaxies access for free at openstax.org figure 26.10 m101, the pinwheel galaxy. this galaxy is a face-on spiral at a distance of 21 million light-years. m101 is almost twice the diameter of the milky way, and it contains at least 1 trillion stars. (credit: nasa, esa, k.
kuntz (johns hopkins university), f. bresolin (university of hawaii), j. trauger (jet propulsion lab), j. mould (noao), y.-h. chu (university of illinois, urbana), and stsci) these measurements of other galaxies support the conclusion already reached from studies of the rotation of our own galaxy—namely, that most of the material in the universe cannot at present be observed directly in any part of the electromagnetic spectrum. an understanding of the properties and distribution of this invisible matter is crucial to our understanding of galaxies. it’s becoming clearer and clearer that, through the gravitational force it exerts, dark matter plays a dominant role in galaxy formation and early evolution. there is an interesting parallel here between our time and the time during which edwin hubble was receiving his training in astronomy. by 1920, many scientists were aware that astronomy stood on the brink of important breakthroughs—if only the nature and behavior of the nebulae could be settled with better observations. in the same way, many astronomers today feel we may be closing in on a far more sophisticated understanding of the large-scale structure of the universe—if only we can learn more about the nature and properties of dark matter.
if you follow astronomy articles in the news (as we hope you will), you should be hearing more about dark matter in the years to come. 26.4 the extragalactic distance scale learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: describe the use of variable stars to estimate distances to galaxies explain how standard bulbs and the tully-fisher relation can be used to estimate distances to galaxies 26.4 • the extragalactic distance scale 909 [image: astronomy_openstax_page927_img1.jpeg] to determine many of the properties of a galaxy, such as its luminosity or size, we must first know how far away it is. if we know the distance to a galaxy, we can convert how bright the galaxy appears to us in the sky into its true luminosity because we know the precise way light is dimmed by distance. (the same galaxy 10 times farther away, for example, would look 100 times dimmer.) but the measurement of galaxy distances is one of the most difficult problems in modern astronomy: all galaxies are far away, and most are so distant that we cannot even make out individual stars in them.
for decades after hubble’s initial work, the techniques used to measure galaxy distances were relatively inaccurate, and different astronomers derived distances that differed by as much as a factor of two. (imagine if the distance between your home or dorm and your astronomy class were this uncertain; it would be difficult to make sure you got to class on time.) in the past few decades, however, astronomers have devised new techniques for measuring distances to galaxies; most importantly, all of them give the same answer to within an accuracy of about 10%. as we will see, this means we may finally be able to make reliable estimates of the size of the universe. variable stars before astronomers could measure distances to other galaxies, they first had to establish the scale of cosmic distances using objects in our own galaxy. we described the chain of these distance methods in celestial distances (and we recommend that you review that chapter if it has been a while since you’ve read it). astronomers were especially delighted when they discovered that they could measure distances using certain kinds of intrinsically luminous variable stars, such as cepheids, which can be seen at very large distances (figure 26.11).