the average lifetime is the ratio of these numbers: the total area of ocean crust compared to the amount created (or destroyed) each year. 27. what is the volume of new oceanic basalt added to earth’s crust each year? assume that the thickness of the new crust is 5 km, that there are 60,000 km of rifts, and that the average speed of plate motion is 4 cm/y. what fraction of earth’s entire volume does this annual addition of new material represent? 28. suppose a major impact that produces a mass extinction takes place on earth once every 5 million years. suppose further that if such an event occurred today, you and most other humans would be killed (this would be true even if the human species as a whole survived). such impact events are random, and one could take place at any time. calculate the probability that such an impact will occur within the next 50 years (within your lifetime). 29. how do the risks of dying from the impact of an asteroid or comet compare with other risks we are concerned about, such as dying in a car accident or from heart disease or some other natural cause?
(hint: to find the annual risk, go to the library or internet and look up the annual number of deaths from a particular cause in a particular country, and then divide by the population of that country.) 30. what fraction of earth’s volume is taken up by the core? 31. approximately what percentage of earth’s radius is represented by the crust? 32. what is the drift rate of the pacific plate over the hawaiian hot spot? 33. what is the percent increase of atmospheric co2 in the past 20 years? 34. estimate the mass of the object that formed meteor crater in arizona. 8 • exercises 287 288 8 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 9.1 apollo 11 astronaut edwin “buzz” aldrin on the surface of the moon. because there is no atmosphere, ocean, or geological activity on the moon today, the footprints you see in the image will likely be preserved in the lunar soil for millions of years. the flag, by the way, was printed on a kind of foil which crinkled easily.
that’s why it looks like it’s waving; there is no atmosphere on the moon and, thus, no wind that can make a flag flutter. (credit: modification of work by nasa/ neil a. armstrong) chapter outline 9.1 general properties of the moon 9.2 the lunar surface 9.3 impact craters 9.4 the origin of the moon 9.5 mercury thinking ahead the moon is the only other world human beings have ever visited. what is it like to stand on the surface of our natural satellite? and what can we learn from going there and bringing home pieces of a different world? we begin our discussion of the planets as cratered worlds with two relatively simple objects: the moon and mercury. unlike earth, the moon is geologically dead, a place that has exhausted its internal energy sources. because its airless surface preserves events that happened long ago, the moon provides a window on earlier epochs of solar system history. the planet mercury is in many ways similar to the moon, which is why the two are discussed together: both are relatively small, lacking in atmospheres, deficient in geological activity, and dominated by the effects of impact cratering.
still, the processes that have molded their surfaces are not unique to these two worlds. we shall see that they have acted on many other members of the planetary system as well. 9.1 general properties of the moon learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: discuss what has been learned from both manned and robotic lunar exploration describe the composition and structure of the moon cratered worlds 9 [image: astronomy_openstax_page307_img1.jpeg] the moon has only one-eightieth the mass of earth and about one-sixth earth’s surface gravity—too low to retain an atmosphere (figure 9.2). moving molecules of a gas can escape from a planet just the way a rocket does, and the lower the gravity, the easier it is for the gas to leak away into space. while the moon can acquire a temporary atmosphere from impacting comets, this atmosphere is quickly lost by freezing onto the surface or by escape to surrounding space. the moon today is dramatically deficient in a wide range of volatiles, those elements and compounds that evaporate at relatively low temperatures. some of the moon’s properties are summarized in table 9.1, along with comparative values for mercury.