[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page436_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page436_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 437 figure 479: kepler's astronomia nova public domain figure 478: kepler's laws after the death of tycho in 1601 and the acquisition of the data, kepler took up the task of devising the rudolphine tables as court mathematician to rudolph. but kepler had more important items on his personal agenda, so the tables weren’t published until 1627. he had no intention of defending tycho’s geo-heliocentrism. the chief defining factor in kepler’s success was not his mathematical ability or his astrological and mystical predilections. it was, rather, his complete faith in tycho’s data and his incredible persistence that served him best. between 1601 and 1609, when his work astronomia nova (new astronomy) was published, kepler tried many possible solutions to the problem of the planets – but in particular to one planet, mars.
mars’ orbit is more eccentric than the other planets, except for mercury, and getting accurate observations of mercury was notoriously difficult due to its nearness to the sun. and tycho had taken many observations of mars at many different positions in its orbit. for kepler, mars was a perfect target. kepler also knew just how accurate tycho’s observations were. many times kepler would work out a solution that was off by only a few minutes of arc; but because he knew the data were accurate to less than two minutes of arc, kepler would reject that attempt and try again. he describes in astronomia nova how one promising series of calculations, (which he was forced to carry out by hand and had to be continuously revised as small errors crept in), after two full years had to be scrapped because it failed to live up to tycho’s data. mars, the roman god of war, was living up to his reputation, and kepler even called his long mathematical assault his “war on mars.” but finally he struck on a solution that fit the data, and it didn’t involve uniform circular motion after all. mars moves in an ellipse. in fact, all the planets move in ellipses, with the sun at one focus.
this finding is now known as [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page437_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page437_img2.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page437_img3.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 438 figure 480: semimajor axis vs. orbital period semimajor axis (au) orbital period (earth years) mercury venus earth mars jupiter saturn kepler’s first law. this wasn’t the only result of eight years of labor. the astronomia nova also contains kepler’s second law: as the planets travel their elliptical paths and as they are viewed from the sun’s vantage point, they sweep out equal areas in equal times. the diagram shows how an ellipse is generated (first figure), the two foci of an ellipse (second figure), and kepler’s second law (third figure). an ellipse is generated when a plane intersects a right circular cone: if a plane slices the cone at right angles, it produces a circle; if it slices at an angle, it produces an ellipse; the steeper the angle, the more eccentric the ellipse.
the second figure shows the two foci (f1 and f2) of the ellipse, and for planet p the sun will always occupy one of the two foci. the third figure shows how a planet p at three different parts of its orbit always sweeps out equal shaded areas when the times between the measurements at p and pʹ are equal and the areas are measured from the sun at one focus at s. these results from the astronomia nova are, from our point of view, its key scientific findings. but if you actually read this work, you may be baffled by all the findings that have no scientific value. it is still loaded with mystical pythagorean musings. you have to search the book closely to find the two laws. kepler sent one copy to galileo, who again responded politely, but privately did not believe in ellipses or any anything else in the book. (contrast this with kepler’s response to galileo’s 1610 best seller, siderius nuncius, where he was positively effusive in his praise.) another decade would pass before kepler produces his last major work, harmonices mundi (harmonies of the world, 1619).