in astronomy, however, it is more common to use sophisticated data-processing techniques that allow thousands of separate frequency bands to be detected simultaneously. thus, the astronomical radio receiver operates much like a spectrometer on a visible-light or infrared telescope, providing information about how much radiation we receive at each wavelength or frequency. after computer processing, the radio signals are recorded on magnetic disks for further analysis. radio waves are reflected by conducting surfaces, just as light is reflected from a shiny metallic surface, and according to the same laws of optics. a radio-reflecting telescope consists of a concave metal reflector (called a dish), analogous to a telescope mirror. the radio waves collected by the dish are reflected to a focus, where they can then be directed to a receiver and analyzed. because humans are such visual creatures, radio astronomers often construct a pictorial representation of the radio sources they observe. figure 6.18 shows 202 6 • astronomical instruments access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page220_img1.jpeg] such a radio image of a distant galaxy, where radio telescopes reveal vast jets and complicated regions of radio emissions that are completely invisible in photographs taken with light. figure 6.18 radio image.
this image has been constructed of radio observations at the very large array of a galaxy called cygnus a. colors have been added to help the eye sort out regions of different radio intensities. red regions are the most intense, blue the least. the visible galaxy would be a small dot in the center of the image. the radio image reveals jets of expelled material (more than 160,000 light-years long) on either side of the galaxy. (credit: nrao/aui) radio astronomy is a young field compared with visible-light astronomy, but it has experienced tremendous growth in recent decades. the world’s largest radio reflectors that can be pointed to any direction in the sky have apertures of 100 meters. one of these has been built at the us national radio astronomy observatory in west virginia (figure 6.19). table 6.2 lists some of the major radio telescopes of the world. figure 6.19 robert c. byrd green bank telescope. this fully steerable radio telescope in west virginia went into operation in august 2000. its dish is about 100 meters across.