the concentrated magnetic field causes more cooling, thereby setting up a self-perpetuating cycle that allows a spot to survive for several weeks. since the plug keeps hot material from flowing up into the sunspot, the region below the plug, represented by red in this picture, becomes hotter. this material flows sideways and then upward, eventually reaching the solar surface in the area surrounding the sunspot. (credit: modification of work by nasa, sdo) the downward-flowing cool material acts as a kind of plug that block the upward flow of hot material, which is then diverted sideways and eventually reaches the solar surface in the region around the sunspot. this outward flow of hot material accounts for the paradox that we described in the sun: a garden-variety star—namely, that the sun emits slightly more energy when more of its surface is covered by cool sunspots. helioseismology has become an important tool for predicting solar storms that might impact earth. active regions can appear and grow large in only a few days. the solar rotation period is about 28 days.
therefore, regions capable of producing solar flares and coronal mass ejections can develop on the far side of the sun, where, for a long time, we couldn’t see them directly. fortunately, we now have space telescopes monitoring the sun from all angles, so we know if there are 16.4 • the solar interior: observations 563 [image: astronomy_openstax_page581_img1.jpeg] sunspots forming on the opposite side of the sun. moreover, sound waves travel slightly faster in regions of high magnetic field, and waves generated in active regions traverse the sun about 6 seconds faster than waves generated in quiet regions. by detecting this subtle difference, scientists can provide warnings of a week or more to operators of electric utilities and satellites about when a potentially dangerous active region might rotate into view. with this warning, it is possible to plan for disruptions, put key instruments into safe mode, or reschedule spacewalks in order to protect astronauts. solar neutrinos the second technique for obtaining information about the sun’s interior involves the detection of a few of those elusive neutrinos created during nuclear fusion.
recall from our earlier discussion that neutrinos created in the center of the sun make their way directly out of the sun and travel to earth at nearly the speed of light. as far as neutrinos are concerned, the sun is transparent. about 3% of the total energy generated by nuclear fusion in the sun is carried away by neutrinos. so many protons react and form neutrinos inside the sun’s core that, scientists calculate, 35 million billion (3.5 × 1016) solar neutrinos pass through each square meter of earth’s surface every second. if we can devise a way to detect even a few of these solar neutrinos, then we can obtain information directly about what is going on in the center of the sun. unfortunately for those trying to “catch” some neutrinos, earth and everything on it are also nearly transparent to passing neutrinos, just like the sun. on very, very rare occasions, however, one of the billions and billions of solar neutrinos will interact with another atom. the first successful detection of solar neutrinos made use of cleaning fluid (c2cl4), which is the least expensive way to get a lot of chlorine atoms together.
the nucleus of a chlorine (cl) atom in the cleaning fluid can be turned into a radioactive argon nucleus by an interaction with a neutrino. because the argon is radioactive, its presence can be detected. however, since the interaction of a neutrino with chlorine happens so rarely, a huge amount of chlorine is needed. raymond davis, jr. (figure 16.19) and his colleagues at brookhaven national laboratory, placed a tank containing nearly 400,000 liters of cleaning fluid 1.5 kilometers beneath earth’s surface in a gold mine at lead, south dakota. a mine was chosen so that the surrounding material of earth would keep cosmic rays (high- energy particles from space) from reaching the cleaning fluid and creating false signals. (cosmic-ray particles are stopped by thick layers of earth, but neutrinos find them of no significance.) calculations show that solar neutrinos should produce about one atom of radioactive argon in the tank each day. figure 16.19 davis experiment. (a) raymond davis received the nobel prize in physics in 2002. (b) davis’ experiment at the bottom of an abandoned gold mine first revealed problems with our understanding of neutrinos.