how did the giant planets grow to be so large? 20. jupiter is denser than water, yet composed for the most part of two light gases, hydrogen and helium. what makes jupiter as dense as it is? 21. would you expect to find free oxygen gas in the atmospheres of the giant planets? why or why not? 22. why would a tourist brochure (of the future) describing the most dramatic natural sights of the giant planets have to be revised more often than one for the terrestrial planets? 23. the water clouds believed to be present on jupiter and saturn exist at temperatures and pressures similar to those in the clouds of the terrestrial atmosphere. what would it be like to visit such a location on jupiter or saturn? in what ways would the environment differ from that in the clouds of earth? 24. describe the different processes that lead to substantial internal heat sources for jupiter and saturn. since 11 • exercises 391 these two objects generate much of their energy internally, should they be called stars instead of planets? justify your answer. 25. research the galileo mission.
what technical problems occurred between the mission launch and the arrival of the craft in jupiter’s system, and how did the mission engineers deal with them? (good sources of information include astronomy and sky & telescope articles, plus the mission website.) figuring for yourself 26. how many times more pressure exists in the interior of jupiter compared to that of earth? 27. calculate the wind speed at the edge of neptune’s great dark spot, which was 10,000 km in diameter and rotated in 17 d. 28. calculate how many earths would fit into the volumes of saturn, uranus, and neptune. 29. as the voyager spacecraft penetrated into the outer solar system, the illumination from the sun declined. relative to the situation at earth, how bright is the sunlight at each of the jovian planets? 30. the ions in the inner parts of jupiter’s magnetosphere rotate with the same period as jupiter. calculate how fast they are moving at the orbit of jupiter’s moon io (see appendix g). will these ions strike io from behind or in front as it moves about jupiter? 392 11 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 12.1 jupiter family.
this montage, assembled from individual galileo and voyager images, shows a “family portrait” of jupiter (with its giant red spot) and its four large moons. from top to bottom, we see io, europa, ganymede, and callisto. the colors are exaggerated by image processing to emphasize contrasts. (credit: modification of work by nasa) chapter outline 12.1 ring and moon systems introduced 12.2 the galilean moons of jupiter 12.3 titan and triton 12.4 pluto and charon 12.5 planetary rings (and enceladus) thinking ahead our imaginations always fall short of anticipating the beauty we find in nature. —geologist laurence soderblom, discussing the 1989 voyager encounter with neptune’s moons all four giant planets are accompanied by moons that orbit about them like planets in a miniature solar system. nearly 200 moons are known in the outer solar system—too many to name individually or discuss in any detail. astronomers anticipate that additional small moons await future discovery. we have also discovered a fascinating variety of rings around each of the jovian planets.
before the voyager missions, even the largest of the outer-planet moons were mere points of light in our telescopes. then, in less than a decade, we had close-up images, and these moons became individual worlds for us, each with unique features and peculiarities. the galileo mission added greatly to our knowledge of the moons of jupiter, and the cassini mission has done the same for the saturn system. in 2015, the nasa new horizons spacecraft completed the initial exploration of the “classical” planets in the solar system with its flyby of pluto and its moons. we include pluto here because in some ways it resembles some of the larger moons in the outer solar system. each new spacecraft mission has revealed many surprises, as the objects in the outer solar system are much more varied and geologically active than scientists had anticipated.