(credit: nasa/jpl-caltech/university of arizona) the issue of how strong the winds on mars can be plays a big role in the 2015 hit movie the martian (https://openstax.org/l/30themartian) in which the main character is stranded on mars after being buried in the sand in a windstorm so great that his fellow astronauts have to leave the planet so their ship is not damaged. astronomers have noted that the martian winds could not possibly be as forceful as depicted in the film because the air pressure is so low. in most ways, however, the depiction of mars in this movie is describe the general composition of the atmosphere on mars explain what we know about the polar ice caps on mars and how we know it describe the evidence for the presence of water in the past history of mars summarize the evidence for and against the possibility of life on mars link to learning 344 10 • earthlike planets: venus and mars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page362_img1.jpeg] remarkably accurate. although the atmosphere contains small amounts of water vapor and occasional clouds of water ice, liquid water is not stable under present conditions on mars.
part of the problem is the low temperatures on the planet. but even if the temperature on a sunny summer day rises above the freezing point, the low pressure means that liquid water still cannot exist on the surface, except at the lowest elevations. at a pressure of less than 0.006 bar, the boiling point is as low or lower than the freezing point, and water changes directly from solid to vapor without an intermediate liquid state (as does “dry ice,” carbon dioxide, on earth). however, salts dissolved in water lower its freezing point, as we know from the way salt is used to thaw roads after snow and ice forms during winter on earth. salty water is therefore sometimes able to exist in liquid form on the martian surface, under the right conditions. several types of clouds can form in the martian atmosphere. first there are dust clouds, discussed above. second are water-ice clouds similar to those on earth. these often form around mountains, just as happens on our planet. finally, the co2 of the atmosphere can itself condense at high altitudes to form hazes of dry ice crystals.
the co2 clouds have no counterpart on earth, since on our planet temperatures never drop low enough (down to about 150 k or about –125 °c) for this gas to condense. the polar caps through a telescope, the most prominent surface features on mars are the bright polar caps, which change with the seasons, similar to the seasonal snow cover on earth. we do not usually think of the winter snow in northern latitudes as a part of our polar caps, but seen from space, the thin winter snow merges with earth’s thick, permanent ice caps to create an impression much like that seen on mars (figure 10.25). figure 10.25 martian north polar cap. (a) this is a composite image of the north pole in summer, obtained in october 2006 by the mars reconnaissance orbiter. it shows the mostly water-ice residual cap sitting atop light, tan-colored, layered sediments. note that although the border of this photo is circular, it shows only a small part of the planet. (b) here we see a small section of the layered terrain near the martian north pole. there is a mound about 40 meters high that is sticking out of a trough in the center of the picture.
(credit a: modification of work by nasa/jpl/msss; credit b: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech/university of arizona) the seasonal caps on mars are composed not of ordinary snow but of frozen co2 (dry ice). these deposits condense directly from the atmosphere when the surface temperature drops below about 150 k. the caps develop during the cold martian winters and extend down to about 50° latitude by the start of spring. quite distinct from these thin seasonal caps of co2 are the permanent or residual caps that are always present near the poles. the southern permanent cap has a diameter of 350 kilometers and is composed of frozen co2 deposits together with a great deal of water ice. throughout the southern summer, it remains at the freezing 10.5 • water and life on mars 345 [image: astronomy_openstax_page363_img1.jpeg] point of co2, 150 k, and this cold reservoir is thick enough to survive the summer heat intact. the northern permanent cap is different. it is much larger, never shrinking to a diameter less than 1000 kilometers, and is composed of water ice. summer temperatures in the north are too high for the frozen co2 to be retained.