(one wonders if he was tempted in those years to go back to bremen where he was offered a salary seven times the amount he was making in lilienthal.) but his commitment was total, and for five years he persevered, corresponding with astronomers all over europe and mastering the arts of astronomical observation. like astronomers everywhere, bessel dreamed of better equipment. he envisioned himself making significant upgrades to the star atlases of his day, a task that most astronomers found tediously boring; but, as a numbers guy, this appealed to him. astrometry – the precision measurement and mapping of star positions – was bessel’s calling. in november, 1809, his dreams came true: out of the blue he received a letter from none other than friedrich wilhelm iii, king of prussia, who offered him a position as director for a new observatory to be constructed at the university of konigsberg, in prussia. it seems that all that correspondence had taken root, and alexander von humboldt, advisor to the king, had recommended bessel for the job.
bessel arrived in konigsberg in the spring of 1810, but napolean was on the march in those years, so it wasn’t until 1813 that the observatory was completed. he used that time to begin a mathematical analysis of james bradley’s observations of 3000 stars, published in 1755. factors that he included were the effects of the atmosphere, peculiarities of bradley’s instruments, and even peculiarities of bradley’s own observational habits (for example, he determined that observations of one of bradley’s assistants was systematically off by one second, which bessel added back into each of that assistant’s observations). this project took bessel seven years to complete, but by the end he had revolutionized the procedures for “reducing” the raw observational data. a new standard was being established where no inaccuracies would be tolerated, and where every observatory would have to search for its own idiosyncratic sources of error. in 1820, bessel received a fraunhofer-influenced precision transit circle, which he used during the next decade to measure the positions of 32,000 stars, which established him as the premier observer in europe.
it was at that point that bessel decided to take up the challenge of stellar parallax. he didn’t do this lightly, because he was all too aware of the many well-publicized failures of the past. as a numbers guy and an acknowledged leader in precision astrometry, he knew his reputation was on the line. even after receiving the fraunhofer heliometer, bessel used it for five years before beginning the attempt, time he spent analyzing every source of error he could find and obsessively tweaking his instruments and his methods. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 457 his first step was to choose a target star. he settled on 61 cygni. an italian astronomer, giuseppe piazzi, a theatine monk in palermo, sicily, was respected for his discovery of the first asteroid, ceres. in the northern constellation of cygnus, the swan, was a small, undistinguished star that had one distinguishable feature: a large proper motion that piazzi had measured to be 5.2 arc-seconds per century when compared to nearby stars.
bessel concluded that 61 cygni, “piazzi’s flying star,” was moving so fast because it must be relatively close to the sun. and the closer the star, the easier it should be to measure its parallax. as it turned out, the konigsberg heliometer resolved 61 cygni into a double star, so bessel had two stars to measure and check against each other. beginning in august, 1837, bessel was spurred on by word that wilhelm struve, using the dorpat refractor, was attempting to measure the parallax of the star vega, the brightest star in the constellation of lyra, the lyre. the race was on, and bessel knew he was behind because he needed a full year of observations to be certain of his results. in december, 1838, bessel was confident enough to publish his results. the parallax was quite small: 0.318 arc-seconds.