once more, gravity will take over, and the core will start to shrink again. we can think of stellar evolution as a story of a constant struggle against gravitational collapse. a star can avoid collapsing as long as it can tap energy sources, but once any particular fuel is used up, it starts to collapse again. the star’s situation is analogous to the end of the main-sequence stage (when the central hydrogen got used up), but the star now has a somewhat more complicated structure. again, the star’s core begins to collapse under its own weight. heat released by the shrinking of the carbon and oxygen core flows into a shell of helium just above the core. this helium, which had not been hot enough for fusion into carbon earlier, is heated just enough for fusion to begin and to generate a new flow of energy. farther out in the star, there is also a shell where fresh hydrogen has been heated enough to fuse helium. the star now has a multi-layered structure like an onion: a carbon-oxygen core, surrounded by a shell of helium fusion, a layer of helium, a shell of hydrogen fusion, and finally, the extended outer layers of the star (see figure 22.17).
as energy flows outward from the two fusion shells, once again the outer regions of the star begin to expand. its brief period of stability is over; the star moves back to the red-giant domain on the h–r diagram for a short time (see figure 22.16). but this is a brief and final burst of glory. 22.4 • further evolution of stars 759 [image: astronomy_openstax_page777_img1.jpeg] figure 22.17 layers inside a low-mass star before death. here we see the layers inside a star with an initial mass that is less than twice the mass of the sun. these include, from the center outward, the carbon-oxygen core, a layer of helium hot enough to fuse, a layer of cooler helium, a layer of hydrogen hot enough to fuse, and then cooler hydrogen beyond. recall that the last time the star was in this predicament, helium fusion came to its rescue. the temperature at the star’s center eventually became hot enough for the product of the previous step of fusion (helium) to become the fuel for the next step (helium fusing into carbon).
but the step after the fusion of helium nuclei requires a temperature so hot that the kinds of lower-mass stars (less than 2 solar masses) we are discussing simply cannot compress their cores to reach it. no further types of fusion are possible for such a star. in a star with a mass similar to that of the sun, the formation of a carbon-oxygen core thus marks the end of the generation of nuclear energy at the center of the star. the star must now confront the fact that its death is near. we will discuss how stars like this end their lives in the death of stars, but in the meantime, table 22.4 summarizes the stages discussed so far in the life of a star with the same mass as that of the sun. one thing that gives us confidence in our calculations of stellar evolution is that when we make h–r diagrams of older clusters, we actually see stars in each of the stages that we have been discussing.
the evolution of a star with the sun’s mass stage time in this stage (years) surface temperature (k) luminosity (lsun) diameter (sun = 1) main sequence 11 billion 6000 1 1 becomes red giant 1.3 billion 3100 at minimum 2300 at maximum 165 helium fusion 100 million 4800 50 10 giant again 20 million 3100 5200 180 table 22.4 760 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page778_img1.jpeg] mass loss from red-giant stars and the formation of planetary nebulae when stars swell up to become red giants, they have very large radii and therefore a low escape velocity.2 radiation pressure, stellar pulsations, and violent events like the helium flash can all drive atoms in the outer atmosphere away from the star, and cause it to lose a substantial fraction of its mass into space. astronomers estimate that by the time a star like the sun reaches the point of the helium flash, for example, it will have lost as much as 25% of its mass.