very low mass stars, like red dwarfs, when they reach the end of their life, will not be able to fuse helium into carbon. these stars will result in a white dwarf stellar remnant that is composed of helium rather than carbon. since red dwarf stars may be on the main sequence for trillions of years, there are not yet any helium core white dwarf stellar remnants that formed this way. another formation path is for a larger star in a multi-star system, while in its red giant stage, to strip off the outer layers of the atmosphere of a companion star, essentially stalling the natural life cycle. the reduction in mass could stop the fusion processes and leave the star as a helium core white dwarf stellar remnant. it is also possible for a star close to 8 solar masses, to produce small amounts of neon from the existing oxygen through the alpha process. this would result in a neon core white dwarf remnant. these are very rare, but some have been found.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page299_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page299_img2.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page299_img3.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 300 figure 343: m1 – the crab nebula component 132 – core collapse supernovae whereas red dwarf stars have a very quiet end, merely cooling as a white dwarf stellar remnant without any fanfare or explosion, and sun-like stars end by ejecting their atmospheres into space, stars larger than 8 solar masses have rather dramatic endings; they explode as core collapse supernovae. figure 343 is an image of a supernova remnant, m1 – the crab nebula. another example would be the veil nebula. these supernovae are called type ii supernovae. the core collapse as the fusion processes decline in the core of the massive star, the outward pressure diminishes. gravity collapses the core. the core may reach temperatures in excess of 10 billion k. at this high level of energy, photons are quite powerful.
these high energy photons, when they collide with atomic nuclei, will break the nuclei apart into smaller atoms, protons, and neutrons. this is called photodisintegration. much energy is required to tear atoms apart. this removes energy from the core of the star. this drop in energy, causes the core to continue to collapse due to gravity. this part of the process only takes a few seconds. eventually the gravitational pressure is so strong that protons and electrons are crushed together. this results in neutrons and neutrinos. this part of the process also only takes a second or two. these neutrinos, like those created in the sun, are able to radiate outward with no interaction with the surrounding material. the core of the star becomes a neutron star. it is a giant ball of neutrons crushed together. (see component 133.) if the mass is high enough after the supernova, the core may continue to collapse into a black hole. (see component 136.) the rebound the collapse at this stage is so violent that the neutrons collapse further than they should. the core rebounds outward sending a powerful shockwave through the outer layers of the star, violently blowing off the outer layers of the star as a supernova remnant.
for a few days after this collapse, the star will shine more brightly than its entire galaxy. it will then fade for several months until it blends into the background of its galaxy. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page300_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 301 equation 20: neutron star formation p + e → n + ν ν is the lower-case greek letter nu and is the symbol for a neutrino figure 344: the first visual neutron star component 133 – neutron stars for stars with initial masses between 8 and 15 solar masses the result of the supernova explosion is likely a neutron star. gravity is so strong that the collapsing core is able to overcome the electron degeneracy pressure. the electrons and protons are fused together in the core creating neutrons and neutrinos. in this size star the stellar remnant is between 1.4 and 3 solar masses. the rest of the material was blown into space through stellar winds or into the supernova remnant. the 3 solar mass upper limit on neutron stars is called the tolman- oppenheimer-volkoff limit. neutron star properties neutron stars are very small and very dense.