the decision whether to transmit or not turns out to be an interesting reflection of how we feel about ourselves and our place in the universe. discussions of transmission also raise the question of who should speak for planet earth. today, anyone and everyone can broadcast radio signals, and many businesses, religious groups, and governments do. it would be a modest step for the same organizations to use or build large radio telescopes and begin intentional transmissions that are much stronger than the signals that leak from earth today. and if we intercept a signal from an alien civilization, then the issue arises whether to reply. who should make the decision about whether, when, and how humanity announces itself to the cosmos? is there freedom of speech when it comes to sending radio messages to other civilizations? do all the nations of earth have to agree before we send a signal strong enough that it has a serious chance of being received at the distances of the stars? how our species reaches a decision about these kinds of questions may well be a test of whether or not there is intelligent life on earth.
30.4 • the search for extraterrestrial intelligence 1085 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1103_img1.jpeg] conclusion whether or not we ultimately turn out to be the only intelligent species in our part of the galaxy, our exploration of the cosmos will surely continue. an important part of that exploration will still be the search for biomarkers from inhabited planets that have not produced technological creatures that send out radio signals. after all, creatures like butterflies and dolphins may never build radio antennas, but we are happy to share our planet with them and would be delighted to find their counterparts on other worlds. the existence of life elsewhere is just one of the unsolved problems in astronomy that we have discussed in this book. a humble acknowledgment of how much we have left to learn about the universe is one of the fundamental hallmarks of science. this should not, however, prevent us from feeling exhilarated about how much we have already managed to discover, and feeling curious about what else we might find out in the years to come. our progress report on the ideas of astronomy ends here, but we hope that your interest in the universe does not.
we hope you will keep up with developments in astronomy through media and online, or by going to an occasional public lecture by a local scientist. who, after all, can even guess all the amazing things that future research projects will reveal about both the universe and our connection with it?
1086 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org key terms amino acids organic compounds that are the molecular building blocks of proteins astrobiology the multidisciplinary study of life in the universe: its origin, evolution, distribution, and fate; similar terms are exobiology and bioastronomy biomarker evidence of the presence of life, especially a global indication of life on a planet that could be detected remotely (such as an unusual atmospheric composition) dna (deoxyribonucleic acid) a molecule that stores information about how to replicate a cell and its chemical and structural components drake equation a formula for estimating the number of intelligent, technological civilizations in our galaxy, first suggested by frank drake extremophile an organism (usually a microbe) that tolerates or even thrives under conditions that most of the life around us would consider hostile, such as very high or low temperature or acidity gene the basic functional unit that carries the genetic (hereditary) material contained in a cell habitable environment an environment capable of hosting life habitable zone the region around a star in which liquid water could exist on the surface of terrestrial-sized planets, hence the most probable place to look for life in a star’s planetary system organic compound a compound containing carbon, especially a complex carbon compound; not necessarily produced by life organic molecule a combination of carbon and other atoms—primarily hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur—some of which serve as the basis for our biochemistry photosynthesis a complex sequence of chemical reactions through which some living things can use sunlight to manufacture products that store energy (such as carbohydrates), releasing oxygen as one by- product protein a key biological molecule that provides the structure and function of the body’s tissues and organs, and essentially carries out the chemical work of the cell rna (ribonucleic acid) a molecule that aids in the flow of genetic information from dna to proteins seti the search for extraterrestrial intelligence; usually applied to searches for radio signals from other civilizations stromatolites solid, layered rock formations that are thought to be the fossils of oxygen-producing photosynthetic bacteria in rocks that are 3.5 billion years old technosignature any observable evidence of technology from an extraterrestrial civilization thermophile an organism that can tolerate high temperatures summary 30.1 the cosmic context for life life on earth is based on the presence of a key unit known as an organic molecule, a molecule that contains carbon, especially complex hydrocarbons.