scott ransom, of the national radio astronomy observatory, explain how millisecond pulsars come about, with some nice animations. and if you thought that a neutron star interacting with a “normal” star was unusual, there are also binary systems that consist of two neutron stars. one such system has the stars in very close orbits to one another, so much that they continually alter each other’s orbit. another binary neutron star system includes two pulsars that are orbiting each other every 2 hours and 25 minutes. as we discussed earlier, pulsars radiate away their energy, and these two pulsars are slowly moving toward one another, such that in about 85 million years, they will actually merge (see gravitational wave astronomy for our first observations of such a merger). we have now reached the end of our description of the final stages of stars, yet one piece of the story remains to be filled in. we saw that stars whose core masses are less than 1.4 msun at the time they run out of fuel end their lives as white dwarfs. dying stars with core masses between 1.4 and about 3 msun become neutron stars.
but there are stars whose core masses are greater than 3 msun when they exhaust their fuel supplies. what becomes of them? the truly bizarre result of the death of such massive stellar cores (called a black hole) is the subject of our next chapter. but first, we will look at an astronomical mystery that turned out to be related to the deaths of stars and was solved through clever sleuthing and a combination of observation and theory. 23.6 the mystery of the gamma-ray bursts learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: everybody loves a good mystery, and astronomers are no exception. the mystery we will discuss in this section was first discovered in the mid-1960s, not via astronomical research, but as a result of a search for the tell-tale signs of nuclear weapon explosions. the us defense department launched a series of vela satellites to make sure that no country was violating a treaty that banned the detonation of nuclear weapons in space. since nuclear explosions produce the most energetic form of electromagnetic waves called gamma rays (see radiation and spectra), the vela satellites contained detectors to search for this type of radiation.
the satellites did not detect any confirmed events from human activities, but they did—to everyone’s surprise—detect short bursts of gamma rays coming from random directions in the sky. news of the discovery was first published in 1973; however, the origin of the bursts remained a mystery. no one knew what produced the brief flashes of gamma rays or how far away the sources were. from a few bursts to thousands with the launch of the compton gamma-ray observatory by nasa in 1991, astronomers began to identify many more bursts and to learn more about them (figure 23.19).
approximately once per day, the nasa satellite detected a flash of gamma rays somewhere in the sky that lasted from a fraction of a second to link to learning give a brief history of how gamma-ray bursts were discovered and what instruments made the discovery possible explain why astronomers think that gamma-ray bursts beam their energy rather than it radiating uniformly in all directions describe how the radiation from a gamma-ray burst and its afterglow is produced explain how short-duration gamma-ray bursts differ from longer ones, and describe the process that makes short-duration gamma-ray bursts explain why gamma-ray bursts may help us understand the early universe 806 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org several hundred seconds. before the compton measurements, astronomers had expected that the most likely place for the bursts to come from was the main disk of our own (pancake-shaped) galaxy. if this had been the case, however, more bursts would have been seen in the crowded plane of the milky way than above or below it. instead, the sources of the bursts were distributed isotropically; that is, they could appear anywhere in the sky with no preference for one region over another. almost never did a second burst come from the same location.
figure 23.19 compton detects gamma-ray bursts. (a) in 1991, the compton gamma-ray observatory was deployed by the space shuttle atlantis. weighing more than 16 tons, it was one of the largest scientific payloads ever launched into space. (b) this map of gamma-ray burst positions measured by the compton gamma-ray observatory shows the isotropic (same in all directions), uniform distribution of bursts on the sky. the map is oriented so that the disk of the milky way would stretch across the center line (or equator) of the oval. note that the bursts show no preference at all for the plane of the milky way, as many other types of objects in the sky do. colors indicate the total energy in the burst: red dots indicate long-duration, bright bursts; blue and purple dots show short, weaker bursts.