these ghostly subatomic particles, introduced in the sun: a nuclear powerhouse, carry away some of the nuclear energy. it is their presence that launches the final disastrous explosion of the star. the total energy contained in the neutrinos is huge. in the initial second of the star’s explosion, the power carried by the neutrinos (1046 watts) is greater than the power put out by all the stars in over a billion galaxies. while neutrinos ordinarily do not interact very much with ordinary matter (we earlier accused them of being downright antisocial), matter near the center of a collapsing star is so dense that the neutrinos do interact with it to some degree. they deposit some of this energy in the layers of the star just outside the core. this huge, sudden input of energy reverses the infall of these layers and drives them explosively outward. most of the mass of the star (apart from that which went into the neutron star in the core) is then ejected outward into space. as we saw earlier, such an explosion requires a star of at least 8 msun, and the neutron star can have a mass of at most 3 msun.
consequently, at least five times the mass of our sun is ejected into space in each such explosive event! the resulting explosion is called a supernova (figure 23.7). when these explosions happen close by, they can be among the most spectacular celestial events, as we will discuss in the next section. (actually, there are at least two different types of supernova explosions: the kind we have been describing, which is the collapse of a massive star, is called, for historical reasons, a type ii supernova. we will describe how the types differ later in this chapter). figure 23.7 five supernova explosions in other galaxies. the arrows in the top row of images point to the supernovae. the bottom row shows the host galaxies before or after the stars exploded. each of these supernovae exploded between 3.5 and 10 billion years ago. note that the supernovae when they first explode can be as bright as an entire galaxy. (credit: modification of work by nasa, esa, and a. riess (stsci)) table 23.1 summarizes the discussion so far about what happens to stars and substellar objects of different initial masses at the ends of their lives.
like so much of our scientific understanding, this list represents a progress report: it is the best we can do with our present models and observations. the mass limits corresponding to various outcomes may change somewhat as models are improved. there is much we do not yet understand about the details of what happens when stars die. 786 23 • the death of stars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page804_img1.jpeg] the ultimate fate of stars and substellar objects with different masses initial mass (mass of sun = 1)1 final state at the end of its life < 0.01 planet 0.01 to 0.08 brown dwarf 0.08 to 0.25 white dwarf made mostly of helium 0.25 to 8 white dwarf made mostly of carbon and oxygen 8 to 10 white dwarf made of oxygen, neon, and magnesium 10 to 40 supernova explosion that leaves a neutron star > 40 supernova explosion that leaves a black hole table 23.1 the supernova giveth and the supernova taketh away after the supernova explosion, the life of a massive star comes to an end.
but the death of each massive star is an important event in the history of its galaxy. the elements built up by fusion during the star’s life are now “recycled” into space by the explosion, making them available to enrich the gas and dust that form new stars and planets. because these heavy elements ejected by supernovae are critical for the formation of planets and the origin of life, it’s fair to say that without mass loss from supernovae and planetary nebulae, neither the authors nor the readers of this book would exist.2 but the supernova explosion has one more creative contribution to make, one we alluded to in stars from adolescence to old age when we asked where the atoms in your jewelry came from. the supernova explosion produces a flood of energetic neutrons that barrel through the expanding material. these neutrons can be absorbed by iron and other nuclei where they can turn into protons. thus, they can build up elements that are more massive than iron, possibly including such terrestrial favorites as gold, silver and uranium. supernovae (and, as we will shortly see, the explosive mergers of neutron stars) are the only candidates we have for places where such heavier atoms can be made.