when we look at galaxies that emitted their light 11 to 12 billion years ago, we now believe we are seeing the seeds of elliptical galaxies and of the central bulges of spirals. over time, these smaller galaxies collided and merged to build up today’s large galaxies. bear in mind that stars that formed more than 11 billion years ago will be very old stars today. indeed when we look nearby (at galaxies we see closer to our time), we find mostly old stars in the nuclear bulges of nearby spirals and in elliptical galaxies. 962 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page980_img1.jpeg] figure 28.6 some of the farthest, faintest, and smallest galaxies ever seen. jwst has obtained spectra and measured redshifts showing that these four galaxies were formed at an unprecedentedly early epoch. all four were formed when the universe was no more than about 400 million years old. the most distant of these galaxies is the one shown at the top of the image, and it dates back to about 330 million years after the big bang, a time when the universe was only about 2 percent of its current age.
the size of each galaxy’s redshift is denoted with the letter z in the diagram. these observations focused on the area in and around the hubble space telescope’s ultra deep field. for over 20 years, this small patch of sky has been the target of nearly all large telescopes, building an exceptionally sensitive data set spanning the full electromagnetic spectrum. now webb is adding its unique view, providing the faintest and sharpest images yet obtained. (credit: modification of work by nasa, esa, csa, and stsci, m. zamani (esa/webb), l. hustak (stsci). science: b. robertson (ucsc), s. tacchella (cambridge), e. curtis-lake (hertfordshire), s. carniani (scuola normale superiore), and the jades collaboration) what such observations are showing us is that galaxies have grown in size as the universe has aged. not only were galaxies smaller several billion years ago, but there were more of them; gas-rich galaxies, particularly the less luminous ones, were much more numerous then than they are today.
those are some of the basic observations we can make of individual galaxies (and their evolution) looking back in cosmic time. now we want to turn to the larger context. if stars are grouped into galaxies, are the galaxies also grouped in some way? in the third section of this chapter, we’ll explore the largest structures known in the universe. 28.1 • observations of distant galaxies 963 [image: astronomy_openstax_page981_img1.jpeg] 28.2 galaxy mergers and active galactic nuclei learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: one of the conclusions astronomers have reached from studying distant galaxies is that collisions and mergers of whole galaxies play a crucial role in determining how galaxies acquired the shapes and sizes we see today. only a few of the nearby galaxies are currently involved in collisions, but detailed studies of those tell us what to look for when we seek evidence of mergers in very distant and very faint galaxies. these in turn give us important clues about the different evolutionary paths galaxies have taken over cosmic time. let’s examine in more detail what happens when two galaxies collide. mergers and cannibalism figure 28.1 shows a dynamic view of two galaxies that are colliding.
the stars themselves in this pair of galaxies will not be affected much by this cataclysmic event. (see the astronomy basics feature box why galaxies collide but stars rarely do.) since there is a lot of space between the stars, a direct collision between two stars is very unlikely. however, the orbits of many of the stars will be changed as the two galaxies move through each other, and the change in orbits can totally alter the appearance of the interacting galaxies. a gallery of interesting colliding galaxies is shown in figure 28.7. great rings, huge tendrils of stars and gas, and other complex structures can form in such cosmic collisions. indeed, these strange shapes are the signposts that astronomers use to identify colliding galaxies. explain how galaxies grow by merging with other galaxies and by consuming smaller galaxies (for lunch) describe the effects that supermassive black holes in the centers of most galaxies have on the fate of their host galaxies 964 28 • the evolution and distribution of galaxies access for free at openstax.org figure 28.7 gallery of interacting galaxies.