seen from opposite sides of earth’s orbit, a nearby star shifts position when compared to a pattern of more distant stars. astronomers actually define parallax to be one-half the angle that a star shifts when seen from opposite sides of earth’s orbit (the angle labeled p in figure 19.6). the reason for this definition is just that they prefer to deal with a baseline of 1 au instead of 2 au. 19.2 • surveying the stars 643 [image: astronomy_openstax_page661_img1.jpeg] figure 19.6 parallax. as earth revolves around the sun, the direction in which we see a nearby star varies with respect to distant stars. we define the parallax of the nearby star to be one half of the total change in direction, and we usually measure it in arcseconds. you can use the astronomical parallax model (https://openstax.org/l/30parallaxmod) to explore how the earth’s motion around the sun causes nearby stars to appear to “wobble” back and forth compared to background stars. adjust the distance to the nearby star and see how the view from earth changes.
units of stellar distance with a baseline of one au, how far away would a star have to be to have a parallax of 1 arcsecond? the answer turns out to be 206,265 au, or 3.26 light-years. this is equal to kilometers (in other words, 31 trillion kilometers). we give this unit a special name, the parsec (pc)—derived from “the distance at which we have a parallax of one arcsecond.” the distance (d) of a star in parsecs is just the reciprocal of its parallax (p) in arcseconds; that is, thus, a star with a parallax of 0.1 arcsecond would be found at a distance of 10 parsecs, and one with a parallax of 0.05 arcsecond would be 20 parsecs away. back in the days when most of our distances came from parallax measurements, a parsec was a useful unit of distance, but it is not as intuitive as the light-year. one advantage of the light-year as a unit is that it emphasizes the fact that, as we look out into space, we are also looking back into time.
the light that we see from a star 100 light-years away left that star 100 years ago. what we study is not the star as it is now, but rather as it was in the past. the light that reaches our telescopes today from distant galaxies left them before earth even existed. in this text, we will use light-years as our unit of distance, but many astronomers still use parsecs when they write technical papers or talk with each other at meetings. to convert between the two distance units, just link to learning 644 19 • celestial distances access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page662_img1.jpeg] bear in mind: 1 parsec = 3.26 light-year, and 1 light-year = 0.31 parsec. e x a m p l e 1 9 . 1 how far is a light-year? a light-year is the distance light travels in 1 year. given that light travels at a speed of 300,000 km/s, how many kilometers are there in a light-year? solution we learned earlier that speed = distance/time. we can rearrange this equation so that distance = velocity × time.
now, we need to determine the number of seconds in a year. there are approximately 365 days in 1 year. to determine the number of seconds, we must estimate the number of seconds in 1 day. we can change units as follows (notice how the units of time cancel out): next, to get the number of seconds per year: now we can multiply the speed of light by the number of seconds per year to get the distance traveled by light in 1 year: that’s almost 10,000,000,000,000 km that light covers in a year. to help you imagine how long this distance is, we’ll mention that a string 1 light-year long could fit around the circumference of earth 236 million times. check your learning the number above is really large. what happens if we put it in terms that might be a little more understandable, like the diameter of earth? earth’s diameter is about 12,700 km. answer: that means that 1 light-year is about 745 million times the diameter of earth. naming stars you may be wondering why stars have such a confusing assortment of names.