why not begin at the very beginning? there are as yet no theories that allow us penetrate to a time before about 10–43 second (this number is a decimal point followed by 42 zeros and then a one). it is so small that we cannot relate it to anything in our everyday 1024 29 • the big bang access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1042_img1.jpeg] experience. when the universe was that young, its density was so high that the general theory of relativity is not adequate to describe it, and even the concept of time breaks down. scientists, by the way, have been somewhat more successful in describing the universe when it was older than 10–43 second but still less than about 0.01 second old. we will take a look at some of these ideas later in this chapter, but for now, we want to start with somewhat more familiar situations. by the time the universe was 0.01 second old, it consisted of a soup of matter and radiation; the matter included protons and neutrons, leftovers from an even younger and hotter universe. each particle collided rapidly with other particles.
the temperature was no longer high enough to allow colliding photons to produce neutrons or protons, but it was sufficient for the production of electrons and positrons (figure 29.14). there was probably also a sea of exotic subatomic particles that would later play a role as dark matter. all the particles jiggled about on their own; it was still much too hot for protons and neutrons to combine to form the nuclei of atoms. figure 29.14 particle interactions in the early universe. (a) in the first fractions of a second, when the universe was very hot, energy was converted into particles and antiparticles. the reverse reaction also happened: a particle and antiparticle could collide and produce energy. (b) as the temperature of the universe decreased, the energy of typical photons became too low to create matter. instead, existing particles fused to create such nuclei as deuterium and helium. (c) later, it became cool enough for electrons to settle down with nuclei and make neutral atoms. most of the universe was still hydrogen. think of the universe at this time as a seething cauldron, with photons colliding and interchanging energy, and sometimes being destroyed to create a pair of particles.
the particles also collided with one another. frequently, a matter particle and an antimatter particle met and turned each other into a burst of gamma-ray radiation. among the particles created in the early phases of the universe was the ghostly neutrino (see the sun: a nuclear powerhouse), which today interacts only very rarely with ordinary matter. in the crowded conditions of the very early universe, however, neutrinos ran into so many electrons and positrons that they experienced frequent interactions despite their “antisocial” natures. by the time the universe was a little more than 1 second old, the density had dropped to the point where neutrinos no longer interacted with matter but simply traveled freely through space. in fact, these neutrinos should now be all around us. since they have been traveling through space unimpeded (and hence unchanged) since the universe was 1 second old, measurements of their properties would offer one of the best tests of the big bang model. unfortunately, the very characteristic that makes them so useful—the fact that they interact so weakly with matter that they have survived unaltered for all but the first second of time—also renders them unable to be measured, at least with present techniques.
perhaps someday someone 29.3 • the beginning of the universe 1025 [image: astronomy_openstax_page1043_img1.jpeg] will devise a way to capture these elusive messengers from the past. atomic nuclei form when the universe was about 3 minutes old and its temperature was down to about 900 million k, protons and neutrons could combine. at higher temperatures, these atomic nuclei had immediately been blasted apart by interactions with high-energy photons and thus could not survive. but at the temperatures and densities reached between 3 and 4 minutes after the beginning, deuterium (a proton and neutron) lasted long enough that collisions could convert some of it into helium, (figure 29.14). in essence, the entire universe was acting the way centers of stars do today—fusing new elements from simpler components. in addition, a little bit of element 3, lithium, could also form. this burst of cosmic fusion was only a brief interlude, however. by 4 minutes after the big bang, more helium was having trouble forming. the universe was still expanding and cooling down. after the formation of helium and some lithium, the temperature had dropped so low that the fusion of helium nuclei into still-heavier elements could not occur.