although this used to be a popular theory, the moon’s composition and structure should be the same as the earth’s if they formed from the same material and at the same time. capture theory. another possibility is that the moon was captured by the earth from the debris in the solar nebula. there are many moons in the solar system that appear to have originated this way. in the case of the moon though, its mass is too close to the mass of the earth. this makes it unlikely that the earth could have captured it. fission theory. and yet another option is that the moon was ejected from the earth. this is one of the oldest theories. the theory suggests that the moon was originally part of the earth in what is now the pacific ocean. this would mean that the earth would have been rotating extremely fast to make this happen. there is no evidence that this was the case. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page150_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 151 figure 128: the moon's internal structure for a free, downloadable virtual moon atlas, go to website: http://sourceforge.net/projects/virtualmoon/ the moon’s core is smaller than it should be.
the moon has no magnetic field. component 48 – the moon’s structure the moon has a differentiated structure similar to the earth’s. there is a core, a mantle, and a crust. the core the moon’s core is likely to be solid and mostly made of iron. it is a smaller percentage of the moon than the earth’s core is of earth. this means that if they were the same size, the moon’s core would still be smaller than the earth’s. the core has a radius of about 1050 km. due to its slow rotation and possibly a solid core, the moon has no magnetic field. small fields have been detected in localized areas. the mantle the moon has a rocky mantle that has a thickness of about 1000 km. the crust the moon’s crust is approximately 100 km thick at its thickest parts. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page151_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 152 figure 129: the far side of the moon component 49 – the moon’s surface regolith the moon’s surface is covered with a thick dusty layer called regolith. this is dust that has formed as a result of billions of years of micrometeorite bombardment.
the moon has no significant atmosphere, so there is no protection for the surface from these micrometeoroids. atmosphere the moon is not very massive, and as a result has gravity which is much less than the earth’s. every object has an escape velocity, the speed at which something must be moving to escape from the gravity of the object. molecules in the atmosphere around an object are in constant motion. if an object, like the moon, is small, then molecules in its atmosphere may have sufficient velocity to escape from the object. over billions of years, any atmosphere that might have existed on the moon has escaped into space. with no atmosphere to protect it, and with no major erosion from water or wind, the surface of the moon is largely the way it has been molded by impacts. the far side of the moon the far side of the moon has many craters, but no major maria (plural form of mare). the soviet union was the first country to see the far side of the moon so most of the features on the far side have russian names.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page152_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 153 maria are large craters that filled with magma 3.9 billion years ago figure 130: the near side of the moon photo by luc viatour naming conventions most features on the moon have latin names. some of the features are named: • oceanus – means ocean. the moon has only one: oceanus procellarum • mare – means sea. the moon has 13 maria. • sinus – means bay • lacus – means lake • vallis – means valley • palus – means marsh • mons – means mountain • montes – means mountain range • catena – means chain of craters • dorsa and dorsum – means ridges • promontorium – means a piece of land that sticks out into a mare • rima – means rille • rimae – means rille system • rupes – means cliff the near side of the moon on the near side of the moon there are many large dark areas. originally, the moon was thought of as a planet like the earth. if this were true, then the dark areas must be seas, or maria.