there is also a very faint, tenuous ring, called the e ring, associated with saturn’s small icy moon enceladus. the particles in the e ring are very small and composed of water ice. since such a tenuous cloud of ice crystals will tend to dissipate, the ongoing existence of the e ring strongly suggests that it is being continually replenished by a source at enceladus. this icy moon is very small—only 500 kilometers in diameter—but the voyager images showed that the craters on about half of its surface have been erased, indicating geological activity sometime in the past few million years. it was with great anticipation that the cassini scientists maneuvered the spacecraft orbit to allow multiple close flybys of enceladus starting in 2005. those awaiting the cassini flyby results were not disappointed. high-resolution images showed long, dark stripes of smooth ground near its south pole, which were soon nicknamed “tiger stripes” (figure 12.28). infrared measurements revealed that these tiger stripes are warmer than their surroundings. best of all, dozens of cryovolcanic vents on the tiger stripes were seen to be erupting geysers of salty water and ice (figure 12.29).
estimates suggested that 200 kilograms of material were shooting into space each second—not a lot, but enough for the spacecraft to sample. 420 12 • rings, moons, and pluto access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page438_img1.jpeg] figure 12.28 enceladus. (a) this image shows both smooth and cratered terrain on saturn’s moon, and also “tiger stripes” in the south polar region (lower part of image). these dark stripes (shown here in exaggerated color) have elevated temperatures and are the source of the many geysers discovered on enceladus. they are about 130 kilometers long and 40 kilometers apart. (b) here enceladus is shown to scale with great britain and the coast of western europe, to emphasize that it is a small moon, only about 500 kilometers in diameter. (credit a, b: modification of work by nasa/jpl/space science institute) when cassini was directed to fly into the plumes, it measured their composition and found them to be similar to material we see liberated from comets (see comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system).
the vapor and ice plumes consisted mostly of water, but with trace amounts of nitrogen, ammonia, methane, and other hydrocarbons. minerals found in the geysers in trace amounts included ordinary salt, meaning that the geyser plumes were high-pressure sprays of salt water. based on the continuing study of enceladus’ bulk properties and the ongoing geysers, in 2015 the cassini mission scientists tentatively identified a subsurface ocean of water feeding the geysers. these discoveries suggested that in spite of its small size, enceladus should be added to the list of worlds that we would like to explore for possible life. since its subsurface ocean is conveniently escaping into space, it might be much easier to sample than the ocean of europa, which is deeply buried below its thick crust of ice. additional analyses of cassini data in 2023 indicated the presence in the plumes of hydrogen cyanide, a key chemical compound for the origin of life. figure 12.29 geysers on enceladus.
(a) this cassini image shows a number of water geysers on saturn’s small moon enceladus, 12.5 • planetary rings (and enceladus) 421 [image: astronomy_openstax_page439_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page439_img2.jpeg] apparently salty water from a subsurface source escaping through cracks in the surface. you can see curved lines of geysers along the four “tiger stripes” on the surface. (b) in this 2023 infrared image from the james webb space telescope, we see a plume of water vapor (in blue) more than 9600 km long, extending out from the southern hemisphere of enceladus (the moon is within the white box in this highly enlarged image). mission scientists estimate that water vapor was being expelled at such a rate that the water could fill an olympic-sized swimming pool in just a couple of hours. (credit a: modification of work by nasa/jpl/space science institute; credit b: modification of work by nasa/esa) rings of uranus and neptune uranus’ rings are narrow and black, making them almost invisible from earth.