this means that many objects that are destined to be small red dwarf stars have not had enough time to reach the main sequence yet. the evolution of a small star prior to it reaching the main sequence is the same stages that a sun-like star passes through. protostar through main sequence is shown in figure 310 as a yellow and then orange line respectively. small star main sequence once on the main sequence, a small red dwarf star will live a quiet stable life fusing hydrogen into helium for trillions of years. this means that all red dwarf stars that have formed are still red dwarf stars. the universe has not existed long enough for them to have left the main sequence. small star elder years as a red dwarf star begins to run low on hydrogen fuel, it will collapse. but, they do not contain enough matter for their gravity to be strong enough to build up the temperatures and pressures in their cores needed to begin helium fusion. red dwarf stars will shrink until the electrons in the helium will not let gravity collapse the star further. at this point the star progresses from a main sequence star to the white dwarf stage. there are no explosions or violent actions. the star becomes an ember cooling to the temperature of the local dust and gas.
the transition to white dwarf is the green line in figure 310. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 272 figure 310: the life of a small star [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page272_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 273 table 33: a high mass star's life stage name 1 dust cloud 2 fragmentation 3 condensation 4 protostar 5 star 6 main sequence 7 helium fusion 8 heavy element fusion 9 supernova 10 neutron star / black hole component 113 – the lives of larger stars as stars become larger, the time spent in each stage of their lives becomes shorter. stars that are higher mass than the sun, also have more complex lives after the main sequence. pre-main sequence for large stars the pre-main sequence lives of stars larger than the sun are shown by the light blue (3 solar mass), blue (9 solar mass), and violet (15 solar mass) lines in figure 311. smaller stars are shown for reference as the red (0.5 solar mass) and yellow (1 solar mass) lines. the path to the main sequence becomes more direct and more horizontal for large stars.
for small and sun-like stars the luminosity drops significantly moving from protostar to the main sequence. for large stars, the change in luminosity is a minor drop, and as the stars are larger, there is actually an increase in luminosity as they move from protostar to the main sequence. note that this part of a star’s life (from protostar to the main sequence) is shorter for larger mass stars. red dwarf stars will take 150 million years to traverse this part of the process. sun-like stars can do it in 50 million years. but three-solar-mass stars will make it to the main sequence in only three millions years. nine solar mass stars only take 150,000 years, and large, 15 solar mass stars only require 60,000 years. main sequence for large stars very large stars may leave the main sequence after as little as 10 million years. large stars may leave the main sequence after 100 million years. post-main sequence for large stars when large stars leave the main sequence there is no helium flash. helium starts fusing as the temperature and pressure reach the levels required.
figure 312 shows the path of large stars (in blue) and shows sun-like stars (yellow) and red dwarf stars (red) for comparison. large stars follow a path that repeatedly crosses the diagram as new stages of alpha fusion occur (dotted blue) until iron is formed. at this point there is a supernova explosion and the remnant will be either a neutron star or a black hole. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 274 figure 311: pre-main sequence evolution of stars [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page274_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 275 figure 312: post-main sequence evolution of stars [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page275_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 276 figure 313: main sequence time vs.