[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page348_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 349 hubble’s law, the cosmic microwave background radiation, gravitational waves, and the concentrations of primordial elements all support the big bang theory component 169 – evidence of the big bang like all scientific theories, once you have a theory, you have to make predictions and then observations to see if there is evidence that supports the theory. hubble’s law the first evidence that supports the big bang theory is hubble’s law. observations of distant galaxies and quasars show that there is a significant redshift in their spectral lines. this shift in frequency corresponds very well to the relationahip: v = h0 * d. this evidence clearly demonstrates that the universe was smaller in the past and has a time of origin. cosmic microwave background radiation (cmbr) the second piece of evidence is the cosmic microwave background radiation. the frequency of this radiation matches the theoretical frequency we should see for electromagnetic radiation when the universe first became transparent to photons. the fact that the radiation is essentially the same frequency everywhere in the universe means we are looking at evidence for a single event.
abundance of primordial elements when astronomers look at materials left over from the early universe – materials that are devoid of heavy elements – they look at the abundances of the various elements. theories of the big bang predict that at specific stages in the life of the early universe different elements were fused from the elementary particles. the expected concentrations for helium-4, helium- 3, deuterium, and lithium-7 can be calculated, and the observed values correlate closely. gravitational waves in september, 2015 gravitational waves were detected for the first time, supporting the big bang theory. since that time there have been at least two more positive detections. gravitational waves appear to move at the speed of light. astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 350 figure 427: flatness diagram by olaf davis the universe must be very close to the critical density component 170 – the flatness problem when astronomers study the curvature of the universe today, it is so close to being perfectly flat that any variation is imperceptible. this is the flatness problem. the total density of the universe is essentially at the critical value. any deviation from a flat universe would quickly grow and become significant.
figure 427 shows that even a very slight deviation from the critical density quickly results in a significant increase over time. this means that if the universe is a small bit away from flat, the universe would have recollapsed already, or the distant galaxies would have receded so quickly, that they would no longer be visible. both of these scenarios are clearly not the case we see in the universe today. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page350_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 351 figure 430: cmbr by wmap (2003) figure 429: cmbr by cobe (1992) figure 428: cmbr by penzias and wilson (1965) component 171 – the horizon problem the cosmic microwave background radiation the furthest thing in the past that astronomers can detect is the cosmic microwave background radiation. based on its redshift, these photons have been travelling for 13.8 billion years, from a time when the universe was 378,000 years old. this radiation, representing 2.7 k, is everywhere throughout the universe. it was discovered in 1964 by arno penzias and robert wilson (see figure 428).
they were working for bell laboratories using a horn-shaped radio antenna (figure 428) to study ground- based microwave transmissions when they found a “hiss” which they could not suppress. ultimately they won the nobel prize in physics for discovering the faint glow of the big bang. this background was predicted in the 1940s. two satellites have been launched to study the cmbr in greater detail, without the interference of the earth’s atmosphere: cobe (figure 429) and wmap (figure 430). this noise was present in all directions, day and night, and was almost uniform in frequency. subtracting out the data from the milky way galaxy (the horizontal brightness in the center of the images), the temperature range in the wmap image is +/- 200 microkelvin.