the sun is as far north on this date as it can get; thus, 90° – 23° (or 67° n) is the link to learning 4.2 • the seasons 107 [image: astronomy_openstax_page125_img1.jpeg] southernmost latitude where the sun can be seen for a full 24-hour period (sometimes called the “land of the midnight sun”). that circle of latitude is called the arctic circle. figure 4.8 earth on june 21. this is the date of the summer solstice in the northern hemisphere. note that as earth turns on its axis (the line connecting the north and south poles), the north pole is in constant sunlight while the south pole is veiled in 24 hours of darkness. the sun is at the zenith for observers on the tropic of cancer. many early cultures scheduled special events around the summer solstice to celebrate the longest days and thank their gods for making the weather warm.
this required people to keep track of the lengths of the days and the northward trek of the sun in order to know the right day for the “party.” (you can do the same thing by watching for several weeks, from the same observation point, where the sun rises or sets relative to a fixed landmark. in spring, the sun will rise farther and farther north of east, and set farther and farther north of west, reaching the maximum around the summer solstice.) now look at the south pole in figure 4.8. on june 21, all places within 23° of the south pole—that is, south of what we call the antarctic circle—do not see the sun at all for 24 hours. the situation is reversed 6 months later, about december 21 (the date of the winter solstice, or the first day of winter in the northern hemisphere), as shown in figure 4.9. now it is the arctic circle that has the 24-hour night and the antarctic circle that has the midnight sun. at latitude 23° s, called the tropic of capricorn, the sun passes through the zenith at noon. days are longer in the southern hemisphere and shorter in the north.
in the united states and southern europe, there may be only 9 or 10 hours of sunshine during the day. it is winter in the northern hemisphere and summer in the southern hemisphere. figure 4.9 earth on december 21. this is the date of the winter solstice in the northern hemisphere. now the north pole is in darkness for 24 hours and the south pole is illuminated. the sun is at the zenith for observers on the tropic of capricorn and thus is low in the sky for the residents of the northern hemisphere. 108 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page126_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page126_img2.jpeg] e x a m p l e 4 . 1 seasonal variations as you can see in figure 4.8, the tropic of cancer is the latitude for which the sun is directly overhead on the summer solstice. at this time, the sun is at a declination of 23° n of the celestial equator, and the corresponding latitude on earth is 23° n of the equator.
if earth were tilted a bit less, then the tropic of cancer would be at a lower latitude, closer to the equator. the arctic circle marks the southernmost latitude for which the day length is 24 hours on the day of the summer solstice. this is located at 90° – 23° = 67° n of earth’s equator. if earth were tilted a bit less, then the arctic circle would move farther north. in the limit at which earth is not tilted at all (its axis is perpendicular to the ecliptic), the tropic of cancer would be right on earth’s equator, and the arctic circle would simply be the north pole. suppose the tilt of earth’s axis were tilted only 5°. what would be the effect on the seasons and the locations of the tropic of cancer and arctic circle? solution if earth were tilted less, the seasons would be less extreme. the variation in day length and direct sunlight would be very small over the course of a year, and the sun’s daily path in the sky would not vary much.