[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page139_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 140 figure 106: earth's energy budget • insect pests: as the vegetation is forced to move toward the poles, the insects that thrive in those climates will also move. this means that areas that have not have widespread disease by insects such as mosquitos will become infested. this will bring tropical diseases to areas not prepared to deal with the new diseases. global warming. the change in the average temperate of the earth is known as global warming. there are natural events that impact global warming, such as volcanos, but human activities also have an impact. the earth’s atmosphere a planet’s atmosphere changes over time. the earth has had three different atmospheres since the planet formed. the current atmosphere is ideal for life that we have on earth at this time. each atmosphere has played a role in reaching where we are today. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page140_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 141 figure 107: global warming drawing by dilaudid primary atmosphere. initially the atmosphere would be composed of those elements that were abundant and available when the earth formed.
this would include large amounts of hydrogen and helium as well as water, ammonia, and methane. the hydrogen and helium would have escaped the earth during the first 500,000 years. the earth’s gravity is not strong enough to prevent these light gases in the atmosphere from reaching escape velocity and reaching interplanetary space. secondary atmosphere. as the earth was cooling, volcanos expelled large amounts of new gases into the atmosphere. these would include water, carbon dioxide, nitrogen, ammonia, methane, sulfur dioxide, and nitric oxide. ultraviolet radiation from the sun, with no protective ozone layer, would penetrate into the atmosphere and split some of the lighter gases into their individual atoms. hydrogen would escape to space and would leave behind nitrogen and oxygen. as the temperature fell, the water would condense to form liquid water on the surface in the form of lakes and oceans. the free oxygen would react with materials in the rocks and no longer be a gas in the atmosphere. tertiary atmosphere. approximately 3.5 billion years ago, life began to emerge in the oceans on planet earth. these simple organisms would convert gases dissolved in the oceans into free oxygen. some of the oxygen formed ozone in the stratosphere and created the ozone layer.
as life flourished, more and more oxygen filled the atmosphere. although much was still being absorbed into the rocks, there was excess. life continued to evolve, moved onto land, and animals began to breathe the oxygen. the tertiary atmosphere consisted of nitrogen, oxygen, and argon with trace amounts of other gases. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page141_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 142 table 11: earth's atmosphere components nitrogen 78.1 % oxygen 20.9 % argon 0.93 % carbon dioxide 0.04 % neon 0.002 % helium 0.0005 % methane 0.0002 % krypton 0.0001 % molecular hydrogen 0.00006 % figure 109: earth's atmosphere components figure 108: earth's atmosphere profile earth’s current atmosphere has well defined layers. the temperature changes significantly at each boundary. figure 108 indicates how the temperatures change in each level. below the violet line is the troposphere. ozone layer there is a layer of ozone between 12 km and 50 km in the stratosphere. this layer protects the surface of the earth from ultraviolet radiation.
90% of all of the ozone in the earth’s atmosphere is in this ozone layer. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page142_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page142_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 143 figure 111: convection cells drawing by surachit figure 110: the earth’s continents drawing by supaman component 44 – earth’s surface the earth’s surface is split between land and water. the land is the continents and the water is the oceans. at this time the earth has 7 continents: north america, south america, africa, europe, asia, australia, and antarctica. plate tectonics the surface of planets also changes over time. one force that shapes the earth’s surface is plate tectonics. the surface of the earth is in motion. this motion is caused by convection cells in the mantle (see figure 111). this results in the earth’s crust being sectioned into tectonic plates. the current set of tectonic plates is shown in figure 113.