a dramatic video summary (https://openstax.org/l/30marssurface) of the first two years of curiosity’s exploration of the martian surface can be viewed as well. visit this website (https://openstax.org/l/30ingenuity) to see the flight log of the ingenuity helicopter. link to learning 10.4 • the geology of mars 337 [image: astronomy_openstax_page355_img1.jpeg] martian samples much of what we know of the moon, including the circumstances of its origin, comes from studies of lunar samples, but spacecraft have not yet returned martian samples to earth for laboratory analysis. it is with great interest, therefore, that scientists have discovered that samples of martian material are nevertheless already here on earth, available for study. these are all members of a rare class of meteorites (figure 10.16)—rocks that have fallen from space. figure 10.16 martian meteorite. this fragment of basalt, ejected from mars in a crater-forming impact, eventually arrived on earth’s surface. (credit: nasa) how would rocks have escaped from mars? many impacts have occurred on the red planet, as shown by its heavily cratered surface.
fragments blasted from large impacts can escape from mars, whose surface gravity is only 38% of earth’s. a long time later (typically a few million years), a very small fraction of these fragments collide with earth and survive their passage through our atmosphere, just like other meteorites. (we’ll discuss meteorites in more detail in the chapter on cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system.) by the way, rocks from the moon have also reached our planet as meteorites, although we were able to demonstrate their lunar origin only by comparison with samples returned by the apollo missions most of the martian meteorites are volcanic basalts; most of them are also relatively young—about 1.3 billion years old. we know from details of their composition that they are not from earth or the moon. besides, there was no volcanic activity on the moon to form them as recently as 1.3 billion years ago. it would be very difficult for ejecta from impacts on venus to escape through its thick atmosphere. by the process of elimination, the only reasonable origin seems to be mars, where the tharsis volcanoes were active at that time.
the martian origin of these meteorites was confirmed by the analysis of tiny gas bubbles trapped inside several of them. these bubbles match the atmospheric properties of mars as first measured directly by viking. it appears that some atmospheric gas was trapped in the rock by the shock of the impact that ejected it from mars and started it on its way toward earth. one of the most exciting results from analysis of these martian samples has been the discovery of both water and organic (carbon-based) compounds in them, which suggests that mars may once have had oceans and perhaps even life on its surface. as we have already hinted, there is other evidence for the presence of flowing water on mars in the remote past, and even extending to the present. in this and the following sections, we will summarize the picture of mars as revealed by all these exploratory missions and by about 40 samples from mars. global properties of mars mars has a diameter of 6790 kilometers, just over half the diameter of earth, giving it a total surface area very nearly equal to the continental (land) area of our planet. its overall density of 3.9 g/cm3 suggests a composition consisting primarily of silicates but with a small metal core.
the planet has no global magnetic field, although there are areas of strong surface magnetization that indicate that there was a global field billions of years ago. apparently, the red planet has no liquid material in its core today that would conduct electricity. 338 10 • earthlike planets: venus and mars access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page356_img1.jpeg] thanks to the mars global surveyor, we have mapped the entire planet, as shown in figure 10.17. a laser altimeter on board made millions of separate measurements of the surface topography to a precision of a few meters—good enough to show even the annual deposition and evaporation of the polar caps. like earth, the moon, and venus, the surface of mars has continental or highland areas as well as widespread volcanic plains. the total range in elevation from the top of the highest mountain (olympus mons) to the bottom of the deepest basin (hellas) is 31 kilometers. figure 10.17 mars map from laser ranging. these globes are highly precise topographic maps, reconstructed from millions of individual elevation measurements made with the mars global surveyor. color is used to indicate elevation.