on march 21, the sun is crossing the celestial equator, so it should be found at the zenith (90°) at noon. on june 21, the sun is 23° n of the celestial equator, so it will be 23° away from the zenith at noon. the altitude above the horizon will be 23° less than the altitude of the zenith (90°), so it is 90° – 23° = 67° above the horizon. check your learning what is the altitude of the sun at noon on december 21, as seen from a place on the tropic of cancer? answer: on the day of the winter solstice, the sun is located about 23° s of the celestial equator. from the tropic of cancer, a latitude of 23° n, the zenith would be a declination of 23° n. the difference in declination between zenith and the position of the sun is 46°, so the sun would be 46° away from the zenith. that means it would be at an altitude of 90° – 46° = 44°.
clarifications about the real world in our discussions so far, we have been describing the rising and setting of the sun and stars as they would appear if earth had little or no atmosphere. in reality, however, the atmosphere has the curious effect of allowing us to see a little way “over the horizon.” this effect is a result of refraction, the bending of light passing through air or water, something we will discuss in astronomical instruments. because of this 110 4 • earth, moon, and sky access for free at openstax.org atmospheric refraction (and the fact that the sun is not a point of light but a disk), the sun appears to rise earlier and to set later than it would if no atmosphere were present. in addition, the atmosphere scatters light and provides some twilight illumination even when the sun is below the horizon. astronomers define morning twilight as beginning when the sun is 18° below the horizon, and evening twilight extends until the sun sinks more than 18° below the horizon. these atmospheric effects require small corrections in many of our statements about the seasons.
at the equinoxes, for example, the sun appears to be above the horizon for a few minutes longer than 12 hours, and below the horizon for fewer than 12 hours. these effects are most dramatic at earth’s poles, where the sun actually can be seen more than a week before it reaches the celestial equator. you probably know that the summer solstice (june 21) is not the warmest day of the year, even if it is the longest. the hottest months in the northern hemisphere are july and august. this is because our weather involves the air and water covering earth’s surface, and these large reservoirs do not heat up instantaneously. you have probably observed this effect for yourself; for example, a pond does not get warm the moment the sun rises but is warmest late in the afternoon, after it has had time to absorb the sun’s heat. in the same way, earth gets warmer after it has had a chance to absorb the extra sunlight that is the sun’s summer gift to us. and the coldest times of winter are a month or more after the winter solstice.
4.3 keeping time learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: the measurement of time is based on the rotation of earth. throughout most of human history, time has been reckoned by positions of the sun and stars in the sky. only recently have mechanical and electronic clocks taken over this function in regulating our lives. the length of the day the most fundamental astronomical unit of time is the day, measured in terms of the rotation of earth. there is, however, more than one way to define the day. usually, we think of it as the rotation period of earth with respect to the sun, called the solar day. after all, for most people sunrise is more important than the rising time of arcturus or some other star, so we set our clocks to some version of sun-time. however, astronomers also use a sidereal day, which is defined in terms of the rotation period of earth with respect to the stars. a solar day is slightly longer than a sidereal day because (as you can see from figure 4.10) earth not only turns but also moves along its path around the sun in a day.