with no ability to send probes there to sample, we will have to derive the answer from the light and other radiation that come to us from these faraway systems (figure 30.16). what types of observations might constitute good evidence for life? link to learning 30.3 • searching for life beyond earth 1073 figure 30.16 earth, as seen by nasa’s voyager 1. in this image, taken from 4 billion miles away, earth appears as a “pale blue dot” representing less than a pixel’s worth of light. would this light reveal earth as a habitable and inhabited world? our search for life on exoplanets will depend on an ability to extract information about life from the faint light of faraway worlds. (credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl-caltech) to be sure, we need to look for robust biospheres (atmospheres, surfaces, and/or oceans) capable of creating planet-scale change. earth hosts such a biosphere: the composition of our atmosphere and the spectrum of light reflected from our planet differ considerably from what would be expected in the absence of life.
presently, earth is the only body in our solar system for which this is true, despite the possibility that habitable conditions might prevail in the subsurface of mars or inside the icy moons of the outer solar system. even if life exists on these worlds, it is very unlikely that it could yield planet-scale changes that are both telescopically observable and clearly biological in origin. what makes earth “special” among the potentially habitable worlds in our solar system is that it has a photosynthetic biosphere. this requires the presence of liquid water at the planet’s surface, where organisms have direct access to sunlight. the habitable zone concept focuses on this requirement for surface liquid water—even though we know that subsurface habitable conditions could prevail at more distant orbits—exactly because these worlds would have biospheres detectable at a distance. indeed, plants and photosynthetic microorganisms are so abundant at earth’s surface that they affect the color of the light that our planet reflects out into space—we appear greener in visible wavelengths and reflect more near-infrared light than we otherwise would. moreover, photosynthesis has changed earth’s atmosphere at a large scale—more than 20% of our atmosphere comes from the photosynthetic waste product, oxygen.
such high levels would be very difficult to explain in the absence of life. other gases, such as nitrous oxide and methane, when found simultaneously with oxygen, have also been suggested as possible indicators of life. when sufficiently abundant in an atmosphere, such gases could be detected by their effect on the spectrum of light that a planet emits or reflects. (as we saw in the chapter on exoplanets, astronomers today are beginning to have the capability of detecting the spectrum of the atmospheres of some planets orbiting other stars.) astronomers have thus concluded that, at least initially, a search for life outside our solar system should focus on exoplanets that are as much like earth as possible—roughly earth-size planets orbiting in the habitable zone—and look for the presence of gases in the atmosphere or colors in the visible spectrum that are hard to explain except by the presence of biology. simple, right? in reality, the search for exoplanet life poses many challenges.
1074 30 • life in the universe access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page1092_img1.jpeg] as you might imagine, this task is more challenging for planetary systems that are farther away and, in practical terms, this will limit our search to the habitable worlds closest to our own. should we become limited to a very small number of nearby targets, it will also become important to consider the habitability of planets orbiting the m-dwarfs we discussed above. if we manage to separate out a clean signal from the planet and find some features in the light spectrum that might be indicative of life, we will need to work hard to think of any nonbiological process that might account for them. “life is the hypothesis of last resort,” noted astronomer carl sagan—meaning that we must exhaust all other explanations for what we see before claiming to have found evidence of extraterrestrial biology. this requires some understanding of what processes might operate on worlds that we will know relatively little about; what we find on earth can serve as a guide but also has potential to lead us astray (figure 30.17).