these are the organisms that live in boiling water in hot springs and under extremes of pressure and temperature by hydrothermal vents on the bottom of the ocean. organisms have been found on earth living below the earth’s surface in rocks. experiments have been done to test the survivability of different organisms in the different conditions that would be experienced as part of the process of panspermia. no final conclusions have been reached, but there are cases where bacteria are able to survive the process. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page369_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 370 figure 446: signs of life in a mars meteorite? component 187 – search for life on mars when you consider the habitable region around the sun, venus, earth, and mars are the most likely candidates to have signs of life. in the case of venus, the runaway greenhouse effect produces surface temperatures hot enough to melt lead, making it unlikely that any life survives. and the harsh conditions make it very difficult to search for signs of prior life. mars, though, is more promising. its temperature is more moderate; it has evidence for former flowing water as well as signs that much water is still there.
so far, no life has been conclusively found. initially, nasa sent landers to mars that were intended to identify if life, even in primitive forms, was present on the planet. in the 1970s nasa used viking landers to search for signatures of life: things that could only be there if life were there to make them happen. soil samples were taken, baked in an oven, and the gases produced were analyzed to search for organic molecules. although initally encouraging, other mechanisms were identified that resulted in the results being inconclusive. many landers and rovers have investigated the surface of mars looking for evidence of water. these current efforts have proved conclusively that liquid water did flow on mars in the past, and in 2015 evidence was found that liquid water is present in the material on mars’ surface. nasa has also been studying meteorites that were found on earth that have been shown to have originated on mars. no conclusive evidence has been found in these samples as of this time. initially, structures were found that resembled bacteria found on earth; the alternative mechanisms were identified that could produce the same features. figure 446 shows thefeature found in meteor alh84001 by nasa.
[image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page370_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 371 figure 447: europa figure 448: ganymede figure 449: titan’s surface figure 450: enceladus component 188 – elsewhere in the solar system although mars seems to be a good place to look for life in our solar system, are there other places that could harbor life? yes! jupiter’s moons two of jupiter’s large moons are believed to have large subsurface liquid saltwater oceans: europa and ganymede. although they are well beyond the sun’s habitable zone, they may be in a habitable zone around jupiter. jupiter’s gravitation force would cause flexing in the moons and this would produce heat and agitation needed to keep the water liquid and perhaps allow it to create and harbor life. both moons show signs that their surfaces have been renewed by the upwelling of liquid water. there are far too few craters. saturn’s moons two of saturn’s moons may also be candidates to find life. titan and enceladus may be viable candidates for harboring life.
although titan is far too cold to satisfy the conditions of a habitable zone as previously described, it has an abundance of organic materials and many lakes of liquid methane on its surface. although this is not liquid water, it may be a suitable medium for chemicals to mix and form the complex molecules needed to form life. at the temperatures on titan, chemical processes would take a very long time compared to the warmer temperatures on earth, but billions of years may still be enough time for simple life to evolve. hydrogen plumes have been found on enceladus by the cassini spacecraft. this indicates that materials needed for building life are available on the moon.