after the variables in nearby galaxies had been used to make distance measurements for a few decades, walter baade showed that there were actually two kinds of cepheids and that astronomers had been unwittingly mixing them up. as a result, in the early 1950s, the distances to all of the galaxies had to be increased by about a factor of two. we mention this because we want you to bear in mind, as you read on, that science is always a study in progress. our first tentative steps in such difficult investigations are always subject to future revision as our techniques become more reliable. the amount of work involved in finding cepheids and measuring their periods can be enormous. hubble, for example, obtained 350 long-exposure photographs of the andromeda galaxy over a period of 18 years and was able to identify only 40 cepheids. even though cepheids are fairly luminous stars, they can be detected in only about 30 of the nearest galaxies with the world’s largest ground-based telescopes.
as mentioned in celestial distances, one of the main projects carried out during the first years of operation of the hubble space telescope was the measurement of cepheids in more distant galaxies to improve the accuracy of the extragalactic distance scale. recently, astronomers working with the hubble space telescope have extended such measurements out to 108 million light-years—a triumph of technology and determination. 910 26 • galaxies access for free at openstax.org figure 26.11 cepheid variable star. in 1994, using the hubble space telescope, astronomers were able to make out an individual cepheid variable star in the galaxy m100 and measure its distance to be 56 million light-years. the insets show the star on three different nights; you can see that its brightness is indeed variable. (credit: modification of work by wendy l. freedman, observatories of the carnegie institution of washington, and nasa/esa) nevertheless, we can only use cepheids to measure distances within a small fraction of the universe of galaxies. after all, to use this method, we must be able to resolve single stars and follow their subtle variations. beyond a certain distance, even our finest space telescopes cannot help us do this.
fortunately, there are other ways to measure the distances to galaxies. standard bulbs we discussed in celestial distances the great frustration that astronomers felt when they realized that the stars in general were not standard bulbs. if every light bulb in a huge auditorium is a standard 100-watt bulb, then bulbs that look brighter to us must be closer, whereas those that look dimmer must be farther away. if every star were a standard luminosity (or wattage), then we could similarly “read off” their distances based on how bright they appear to us. alas, as we have learned, neither stars nor galaxies come in one standard-issue luminosity. nonetheless, astronomers have been searching for objects out there that do act in some way like a standard bulb—that have the same intrinsic (built-in) brightness wherever they are. a number of suggestions have been made for what sorts of objects might be effective standard bulbs, including the brightest supergiant stars, planetary nebulae (which give off a lot of ultraviolet radiation), and the average globular cluster in a galaxy. one object turns out to be particularly useful: the type ia supernova.
these supernovae involve the explosion of a white dwarf in a binary system (see the evolution of binary star systems) observations show that supernovae of this type all reach nearly the same luminosity (about 4.5 × 109 lsun) at maximum light. with such tremendous luminosities, these supernovae have been detected out to a distance of more than 8 billion light-years and are therefore especially attractive to astronomers as a way of determining distances on a large scale (figure 26.12). 26.4 • the extragalactic distance scale 911 [image: astronomy_openstax_page929_img1.jpeg] figure 26.12 type ia supernova. the bright object in the galaxy m101 shown by the arrow is a type ia supernova seen in 2011. such a supernova can briefly outshine its entire host galaxy. since type ia supernovae all come from the same kind of stellar explosion and have the same extreme increase in their luminosity, astronomers can use them as a standard bulb. (credit: b. j.