it includes the filaments of galaxies and the voids where there are very few galaxies. [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page21_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page21_img2.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 22 figure 10: parts of a circle component 2 – it’s all about me although we are not the center of the universe, we are the center of our lives: our families, our activities, ourselves. it is only natural that when we look outward at the world around us, at the solar system or at the universe overall, we think of it in terms of ourselves. after all, we perceive the universe through our eyes, so everything we see is outward from those eyes. there is great pleasure and enjoyment in gazing at the heavens. i could do it for hours and hours. but astronomy is a science, and that means as astronomers we need to make accurate observations, and then make careful measurements of those observations. let’s take a closer look at how we measure what we observe.
parts of a circle when we measure distances in a room, we measure distance up and down (height), distance right and left (width), and distance away from us (length). but when we measure distances to objects in the celestial sphere, we need to use spherical coordinates. these coordinates are also distance along the sphere to the right and left, distance along the sphere up and down, and distance away from us. the first two, since they are along a sphere, are measured as angles; angle to the right or left, and angle up or down. coordinates when measured in angular distances are measured in degrees (°), arc-minutes (‘), and arc-seconds (“) (see figure 10). these are parts of a circle. a complete circle has 360° (degrees). each degree has 60‘ (arc-minutes), and each arc-minute has 60“ (arc-seconds). [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page22_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 23 the way we map the universe is based on us and the things with which we are most familiar: the earth. there are many coordinate systems that are used by astronomers. each has its pros and cons.
one way of mapping the universe is very similar to the way we map the surface of the earth. let’s take a look at how we map the earth. altitude and azimuth when we are in the field observing, we do not always know where the lines of right ascension and declination are. sometimes we want a system that lets us easily, and without equipment, tell the observers around us where an object is located. to do this we use altitude and azimuth. altitude (see figure 11) is the angular height above the horizon. the horizon itself is 0 degrees altitude. the point directly over your head, called the zenith, is located at 90 degrees altitude. azimuth (see figure 12) is the angular distance around the horizon, starting with 0 ° azimuth at north, 90 ° at east, 180 ° at south, and 270 ° at west. the altitude and azimuth coordinate system is based on the center of your head. different observers’ heads are in different locations, so the center of this coordinate system is different for every observer. if they are close to you, then the difference is so small it is usually negligable.
figure 12: lines of azimuth north: 0 northeast: 45 east: 90 southeast: 135 south: 180 west: 270 northwest: 315 southwest: 225 figure 11: lines of altitude [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page23_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page23_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 24 component 3 – how we measure angles astronomers have sophisticated equipment that lets them very accurately measure angles in the sky. but that is no help to most of us. we find ourselves out in a field with a modest telescope or binoculars. how do we take measurements? and once we have those measurements how can we convert them into distances? angular distances using an angular distance does not tell us how many miles or kilometers wide that angle is. the actual width in miles or kilometers depends on how far away the object is. as you move away from the observer, the angle stays the same, but the width of that angle at the object grows (see figure 13). if you keep the angular width the same and double the distance, then you also double the size of the width whether in miles or kilometers.