the holy office began an official investigation by the congregation of the index, and in early 1616, de revolutionibus, which had been taught and published for 73 years, [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page441_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 442 figure 484: dialogo public domain was placed on the index of proscribed works until it could be “corrected.” and galileo was informed that he could not hold or defend heliocentrism, since a moving earth was “foolish, absurd, and heretical.” this wasn’t the end of it, however. one prelate, cardinal maffeo barberini, was a supporter of galileo, even at one point writing a poem celebrating him. he told galileo it would be acceptable to discuss heliocentrism if he made it clear that it was only a hypothesis. in 1623, this same cardinal barberini was elected pope urban viii, and galileo chose to take advantage of the new situation.
he published a book, il saggiatore (the assayer, 1623), that supported the ancient idea of atomism, which some church scholars interpreted as an attack on the dogma of transubstantiation. but the new pope, who was not a patron of the jesuits, would not allow any attacks on his great friend. emboldened even further, galileo went on to publish the work that eventually proved to be his downfall, dialogo…sopra i due massimi sistemi del mondo… (dialog on the two chief world systems, 1632), which was written in italian to assure a wide public readership. the dialog has three characters that spend four days discussing philosophical issues, in particular, the ptolemaic and copernican systems. one of the three represents galileo, who defends copernicus; another represents an intelligent layman; and the third represents a simple-minded defender of ptolemy and aristotle. the jesuits cleverly compared the opinions of simplicio, the simpleton, with statements that had been made by the pope, making it appear that galileo was publicly ridiculing him. the pope was completely turned around and allowed charges to be brought forward by the inquisition.
ultimately, galileo was convicted of “grave suspicion of heresy” and not heresy itself, in 1633. a conviction for heresy would have meant that galileo would have undergone torture, and then he would have been burned at the stake. instead, he was shown the instruments of torture, after which, as a good catholic, he recanted. his crime was failing to obey the 1616 order not to hold or defend heliocentrism, for which he was sentenced to house arrest until his death in 1642. the key point is that galileo did not have the proof he needed to win the scientific argument, [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page442_img1.jpeg] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 443 since stellar parallax was not observable even with his new telescope. and by venturing into theology he really had no chance to win that kind of turf war. his ability to create enemies at every turn was also certainly a factor. but even house arrest and the onset of blindness could not completely deter him.
discorsi e dimonstrazioni matematiche intorno a due nuove scienza (discourses and mathematical demonstrations on two new sciences, 1638) was smuggled out of italy and published in leiden, south holland. this was galileo’s last book, and it was a summation of all his work on terrestrial physics. it was this work that had the greatest impact on isaac newton. it was newton who finally put kepler’s astronomy together with galileo’s physics to complete the scientific revolution. newton’s solution to the problem of the planets isaac newton (1642-1727) was born on christmas day, 1642. his father died before he was born, so he was raised on a farm owned by his mother in rural england. his childhood was not a happy one, because his mother re-married and the young isaac never accepted his stepfather. early on it became clear that isaac had a talent for schoolwork and was a disaster at farm-work. he entered cambridge university in 1661 as a subsizar, a kind of work-study servant to older, wealthier students. the curriculum still emphasized aristotle, but newton read widely outside of the required subjects.