and most of them have quasars inside them, not easily visible to us because they are buried by enormous amounts of dust and gas. a collision between two cars creates quite a mess, pushing parts out of their regular place. in the same way, if two galaxies collide and merge, then gas and dust (though not so much the stars) can get pushed out of their regular orbits. some may veer close enough to the black hole in one galaxy or the other to be devoured by it and so provide the necessary fuel to power a quasar. as we saw, galaxy collisions and mergers happened most frequently when the universe was young and probably help account for the fact that quasars were most common when the universe was only about 20% of its current age. collisions in today’s universe are less frequent, but they do happen. once a galaxy reaches the size of the milky way, most of the galaxies it merges with will be much smaller galaxies—dwarf galaxies (see the chapter on galaxies). these don’t disrupt the big galaxy much, but they can supply some additional gas to its black hole.
by the way, if two galaxies, each of which contains a black hole, collide, then the two black holes may merge and form an even larger black hole (figure 27.18). in this process they will emit a burst of gravitational waves. one of the main goals of the european space agency’s planned lisa (laser interferometer space antenna) mission is to detect the gravitational wave signals from the merging of supermassive black holes. figure 27.18 colliding galaxies with two black holes. we compare hubble space telescope visible-light (left) and chandra x-ray (right) images of the central regions of ngc 6240, a galaxy about 400 million light-years away. it is a prime example of a galaxy in which stars are forming, evolving, and exploding at an exceptionally rapid rate due to a relatively recent merger (30 million years ago). the chandra image shows two bright x-ray sources, each produced by hot gas surrounding a black hole. over the course of the next few hundred million years, the two supermassive black holes, which are about 3000 light-years apart, will drift toward each other and merge to form an even larger black hole.
this detection of a binary black hole supports the idea that black holes can grow to enormous masses in the centers of galaxies by merging with nearby galaxies. (credit left: modification of work by nasa/cxc/mpe/ s.komossa et al; credit right: nasa/stsci/r. p. van der marel, j. gerssen) watch two galaxies collide (https://openstax.org/l/30galcolsuperma) to form a supermassive black hole. link to learning 27.3 • quasars as probes of evolution in the universe 947 [image: astronomy_openstax_page965_img1.jpeg] how does the black hole influence the formation of stars in the galaxy? we have seen that the material in galaxies can influence the growth of the black hole. the black hole in turn can also influence the galaxy in which it resides. it can do so in three ways: through its jets, through winds of particles that manage to stream away from the accretion disk, and through radiation from the accretion disk.
as they stream away from the black hole, all three can either promote star formation by compressing the surrounding gas and dust—or instead suppress star formation by heating the surrounding gas and shredding molecular clouds, thereby inhibiting or preventing star formation. the outflowing energy can even be enough to halt the accretion of new material and starve the black hole of fuel. astronomers are still trying to evaluate the relative importance of these effects in determining the overall evolution of galactic bulges and the rates of star formation. in summary, we have seen how galaxies and supermassive black holes can each influence the evolution of the other: the galaxy supplies fuel to the black hole, and the quasar can either support or suppress star formation. the balance of these processes probably helps account for the correlation between black hole and bulge masses, but there are as yet no theories that explain quantitatively and in detail why the correlation between black hole and bulge masses is as tight as it is or why the black hole mass is always about 1/200 times the mass of the bulge.