indeed, gas near a supermassive black hole reaches a temperature of about 150,000 k, about 100 times hotter than a spaceship returning to earth. it can even get so hot—millions of degrees—that it radiates x-rays. figure 27.10 friction in earth’s atmosphere. in this artist’s impression, the rapid motion of a spacecraft (the apollo mission reentry capsule) through the atmosphere compresses and heats the air ahead of it, which heats the spacecraft in turn until it glows red hot. pushing on the air slows down the spacecraft, turning the kinetic energy of the spacecraft into heat. fast-moving gas falling into a quasar heats up in a similar way. (credit: modification of work by nasa) the amount of energy that can be liberated this way is enormous. einstein showed that mass and energy are interchangeable with his famous formula e = mc2 (see the sun: a nuclear powerhouse). a hydrogen bomb releases just 1% of that energy, as does a star. quasars are much more efficient than that. the energy released falling to the event horizon of a black hole can easily reach 10% or, in the extreme theoretical limit, 32%, of that energy.
(unlike the hydrogen atoms in a bomb or a star, the gas falling into the black hole is not actually losing mass from its atoms to free up the energy; the energy is produced just because the gas is falling closer and closer to the black hole.) this huge energy release explains how a tiny volume like the region around a black hole can release as much power as a whole galaxy. but to radiate all that energy, instead of just falling inside the event horizon with barely a peep, the hot gas must take the time to swirl around the star in the accretion disk and emit some of its energy. you might be wondering how much mass from its accretion disk a quasar black hole can consume at any given time. in 2024, astronomers were able to make measurements of a very distant quasar with catalog number j0529-4351, whose central black hole already contains some 17 billion times the mass of our sun. they found that the black hole was eating approximately the mass of our sun each day! that’s an astounding rate of 27.2 • supermassive black holes: what quasars really are 939 [image: astronomy_openstax_page957_img1.jpeg] consumption.
they concluded that the energy produced from the accretion disk makes this quasar the most luminous object we have seen so far anywhere in the universe. (but it’s so far away that to us, the quasar just looks like an ordinary star.) most black holes don’t show any signs of quasar emission. we call them “quiescent.” but, like sleeping dragons, they can be woken up by being roused with a fresh supply of gas. our own milky way black hole is currently quiescent, but it may have been a quasar just a few million years ago (figure 27.11). two giant bubbles that extend 25,000 light-years above and below the galactic center are emitting gamma rays. were these produced a few million years ago when a significant amount of matter fell into the black hole at the center of the galaxy? astronomers are still working to understand what remarkable event might have formed these enormous bubbles. figure 27.11 fermi bubbles in the galaxy. giant bubbles shining in gamma-ray light lie above and below the center of the milky way galaxy, as seen by the fermi satellite.
(the gamma-ray and x-ray image is superimposed on a visible-light image of the inner parts of our galaxy.) the bubbles may be evidence that the supermassive black hole at the center of our galaxy was a quasar a few million years ago. (credit: modification of work by nasa’s goddard space flight center) the physics required to account for the exact way in which the energy of infalling material is converted to radiation near a black hole is far more complicated than our simple discussion suggests. to understand what happens in the “rough and tumble” region around a massive black hole, astronomers and physicists must resort to computer simulations (and they require supercomputers, fast machines capable of awesome numbers of calculations per second). the details of these models are beyond the scope of our book, but they support the basic description presented here. radio jets so far, our model seems to explain the central energy source in quasars and active galaxies. but, as we have seen, there is more to quasars and other active galaxies than the point-like energy source. they can also have long jets that glow with radio waves, light, and sometimes even x-rays, and that extend far beyond the limits of the parent galaxy.