(credit a: modification of work by brookhaven national laboratory; credit b: modification of work by the united states department of energy) this was an amazing project: they counted argon atoms about once per month—and remember, they were looking for a tiny handful of argon atoms in a massive tank of chlorine atoms. when all was said and done, 564 16 • the sun: a nuclear powerhouse access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page582_img1.jpeg] davis’ experiment, begun in 1970, detected only about one-third as many neutrinos as predicted by solar models! this was a shocking result because astronomers thought they had a pretty good understanding of both neutrinos and the sun’s interior. for many years, astronomers and physicists wrestled with davis’ results, trying to find a way out of the dilemma of the “missing” neutrinos. eventually davis’ result was explained by the surprising discovery that there are actually three types of neutrinos. solar fusion produces only one type of neutrino, the so-called electron neutrino, and the initial experiments to detect solar neutrinos were designed to detect this one type.
subsequent experiments showed that these neutrinos change to a different type during their journey from the center of the sun through space to earth in a process called neutrino oscillation. an experiment, conducted at the sudbury neutrino observatory in canada, was the first one designed to capture all three types of neutrinos (figure 16.20). the experiment was located in a mine 2 kilometers underground. the neutrino detector consisted of a 12-meter-diameter transparent acrylic plastic sphere, which contained 1000 metric tons of heavy water. remember that an ordinary water nucleus contains two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. heavy water instead contains two deuterium atoms and one oxygen atom, and incoming neutrinos can occasionally break up the loosely bound proton and neutron that make up the deuterium nucleus. the sphere of heavy water was surrounded by a shield of 1700 metric tons of very pure water, which in turn was surrounded by 9600 photomultipliers, devices that detect flashes of light produced after neutrinos interact with the heavy water. figure 16.20 sudbury neutrino detector. the 12-meter sphere of the sudbury neutrino detector lies more than 2 kilometers underground and holds 1000 metric tons of heavy water.
(credit: a.b. mcdonald (queen’s university) et al., the sudbury neutrino observatory institute) to the enormous relief of astronomers who make models of the sun, the sudbury experiment detected about 1 neutrino per hour and has shown that the total number of neutrinos reaching the heavy water is just what solar models predict. only one-third of these, however, are electron neutrinos. it appears that two-thirds of the electron neutrinos produced by the sun transform themselves into one of the other types of neutrinos as they make their way from the core of the sun to earth. this is why the earlier experiments saw only one-third the number of neutrinos expected. although it is not intuitively obvious, such neutrino oscillations can happen only if the mass of the electron neutrino is not zero. other experiments indicate that its mass is tiny (even compared to the electron). the 2015 nobel prize in physics was awarded to researchers takaaki kajita and arthur b. mcdonald for their work establishing the changeable nature of neutrinos.
(raymond davis shared the 2002 nobel prize with japan’s masatoshi koshiba for the experiments that led to our understanding of the neutrino problem in the first 16.4 • the solar interior: observations 565 [image: astronomy_openstax_page583_img1.jpeg] place.) but the fact that the neutrino has mass at all has deep implications for both physics and astronomy. for example, we will look at the role that neutrinos play in the inventory of the mass of the universe in the big bang. the borexino experiment, an international experiment conducted in italy, detected neutrinos coming from the sun that were identified as coming from different reactions. whereas the p-p chain is the reaction producing most of the sun’s energy, it is not the only nuclear reaction occurring in the sun’s core. there are side reactions involving nuclei of such elements as beryllium and boron. by probing the number of neutrinos that come from each reaction, the borexino experiment has helped us confirm in detail our understanding of nuclear fusion in the sun. in 2014, the borexino experiment also identified neutrinos that were produced by the first step in the p-p chain, confirming the models of solar astronomers.