suppose you are standing in the center of a large, densely populated city that is exactly circular, surrounded by a ring of suburbs with lower-density population, surrounded in turn by a ring of farmland. from this specific location, would you say the population distribution is isotropic? homogeneous? 16. astronomers have been making maps by observing a slice of the universe and seeing where the galaxies lie within that slice. if the universe is isotropic and homogeneous, why do they need more than one slice? suppose they now want to make each slice extend farther into the universe. what do they need to do? 17. human civilization is about 10,000 years old as measured by the development of agriculture. if your telescope collects starlight tonight that has been traveling for 10,000 years, is that star inside or outside our milky way galaxy? is it likely that the star has changed much during that time? 18. given that only about 5% of the galaxies visible in the hubble deep field are bright enough for astronomers to study spectroscopically, they need to make the most of the other 95%. one technique is to use their colors and apparent brightnesses to try to roughly estimate their redshift.
how do you think the inaccuracy of this redshift estimation technique (compared to actually measuring the redshift from a 1002 28 • exercises access for free at openstax.org spectrum) might affect our ability to make maps of large-scale structures such as the filaments and voids shown in figure 28.21? figuring for yourself 19. using the information from example 28.1, how much fainter an object will you have to be able to measure in order to include the same kinds of galaxies in your second survey? remember that the brightness of an object varies as the inverse square of the distance. 20. using the information from example 28.1, if galaxies are distributed homogeneously, how many times more of them would you expect to count on your second survey? 21. using the information from example 28.1, how much longer will it take you to do your second survey? 22. galaxies are found in the “walls” of huge voids; very few galaxies are found in the voids themselves. the text says that the structure of filaments and voids has been present in the universe since shortly after the expansion began 13.8 billion years ago.
in science, we always have to check to see whether some conclusion is contradicted by any other information we have. in this case, we can ask whether the voids would have filled up with galaxies in roughly 14 billion years. observations show that in addition to the motion associated with the expansion of the universe, the galaxies in the walls of the voids are moving in random directions at typical speeds of 300 km/s. at least some of them will be moving into the voids. how far into the void will a galaxy move in 14 billion years? is it a reasonable hypothesis that the voids have existed for 14 billion years? 23. calculate the velocity, the distance, and the look-back time of the most distant galaxies in figure 28.21 using the hubble constant given in this text and the redshift given in the diagram. remember the doppler formula for velocity and the hubble law (v = h × d, where d is the distance to a galaxy). for these low velocities, you can neglect relativistic effects. 24. assume that dark matter is uniformly distributed throughout the milky way, not just in the outer halo but also throughout the bulge and in the disk, where the solar system lives.
how much dark matter would you expect there to be inside the solar system? would you expect that to be easily detectable? hint: for the radius of the milky way’s dark matter halo, use r = 300,000 light-years; for the solar system’s radius, use 100 au; and start by calculating the ratio of the two volumes. 25. the simulated box of galaxy filaments and superclusters shown in figure 28.29 stretches across 1 billion light-years. if you were to make a scale model where that box covered the core of a university campus, say 1 km, then how big would the milky way galaxy be? how far away would the andromeda galaxy be in the scale model? 26. the first objects to collapse gravitationally after the big bang might have been globular cluster-size galaxy pieces, with masses around 106 solar masses. suppose you merge two of those together, then merge two larger pieces together, and so on, lego-style, until you reach a milky way mass, about 1012 solar masses. how many merger generations would that take, and how many original pieces?