astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 424 figure 461: the stellar parallax problem figure 462: eudoxus' measurement so when aristarchus stated that the earth turns on its axis west to east once per day, philosophers objected that if that is so, objects dropped from a tower would hit the ground west of where they were actually observed to hit, right at the base of the tower. what about the wind? shouldn’t there be constant easterly winds if the earth is spinning underneath them? but the clinching argument against heliocentrism was the prediction of stellar parallax. in the diagram, the earth is shown at two positions half a year apart, which would be the extremes of its orbit around the sun. the location of a star on the sphere of fixed stars should appear to be at different angles when measured by an observer on the earth, that is, angles a and b should be different. for the opponents of heliocentrism, the fact that no difference was ever observed meant that the earth did not move. the only argument aristarchus could give was that the stars were too far away for the difference in angles to be measurable. he was, of course, correct.
but the absence of data is never a very strong argument in favor of a hypothesis that predicts the existence of that data. these three arguments against a sun-centered system were never seriously challenged until copernicus did so nearly 2000 years later. and as we will see, all of these same arguments were used against copernicus in his day. more astronomy at alexandria eratosthenes of cyrene was a scholar at alexandria in the next generation after aristarchus. his fame is due to the calculation of the circumference of the earth with great precision. the story goes that eratosthenes had gotten word that a certain well in the egyptian city of syene (modern-day aswan) on the nile river cast no shadow at the bottom when the sun was directly overhead on the summer solstice. he measured the angle of the shadow cast by a vertical gnomon on the same day in alexandria, and came up with 7°12’.
fortunately, he had a reasonably accurate measure for the distance between syene and alexandria because the royal government employed civil servants to [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page424_img1.png] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page424_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 425 figure 463: apollonius' eccentric model b a c p e figure 464: apollonius' epicycle-on-deferent model b a p e b a p e d d walk between various locations while counting their paces. 7°12’ is 1/50th of a circle, and with a distance of 5000 stades paced off between the two locations, he calculated the circumference of the earth as 250,000 stades. a stade was a standard of measure used widely thereabouts, being the distance for a footrace held at the stadium where the olympic games were held. today, estimates vary about what that distance actually was. but eratosthenes’ reasoning was impeccable, and most scholars credit him with an error of only a few percent.
(it is interesting to note that columbus used the very smallest estimate for the length of a stade so that he could convince potential underwriters of the feasibility of sailing to asia by going west.) in the generation of scholars after eratosthenes, apollonius of perga made very important contributions to astronomy. he introduced new mathematical models for calculating planetary positions that would be used until kepler introduced modern methods in the 17th century ce. apollonius was still dealing with the problem of the planets, which had three components. so he came up with three different models for solving each one, still using uniform circular motion. the first was the eccentric model. in the diagram, the planet travels in a circle at a constant speed around its center, c. but the earth is not located at the center: it is eccentric (off center). this addresses the problem of variations in brightness observed for some of the planets. as you can see, the planet p will sometimes be closer, and at other times will be farther away from the earth. by choosing values for the speed of each planet, variations in brightness can be modeled for each planet that exhibits such changes. this means that each planet will have its own mathematical model.