what kind of motion for a star does not produce a doppler effect? explain. 8. describe how bohr’s model used the work of maxwell. 9. explain why light is referred to as electromagnetic radiation. 10. explain the difference between radiation as it is used in most everyday language and radiation as it is used in an astronomical context. 11. what are the differences between light waves and sound waves? 12. which type of wave has a longer wavelength: am radio waves (with frequencies in the kilohertz range) or fm radio waves (with frequencies in the megahertz range)? explain. 13. explain why astronomers long ago believed that space must be filled with some kind of substance (the “aether”) instead of the vacuum we know it is today. 178 5 • collaborative group activities access for free at openstax.org 14. explain what the ionosphere is and how it interacts with some radio waves. 15. which is more dangerous to living things, gamma rays or x-rays? explain. 16. explain why we have to observe stars and other astronomical objects from above earth’s atmosphere in order to fully learn about their properties. 17.
explain why hotter objects tend to radiate more energetic photons compared to cooler objects. 18. explain how we can deduce the temperature of a star by determining its color. 19. explain what dispersion is and how astronomers use this phenomenon to study a star’s light. 20. explain why glass prisms disperse light. 21. explain what joseph fraunhofer discovered about stellar spectra. 22. explain how we use spectral absorption and emission lines to determine the composition of a gas. 23. explain the results of rutherford’s gold foil experiment and how they changed our model of the atom. 24. is it possible for two different atoms of carbon to have different numbers of neutrons in their nuclei? explain. 25. what are the three isotopes of hydrogen, and how do they differ? 26. explain how electrons use light energy to move among energy levels within an atom. 27. explain why astronomers use the term “blueshifted” for objects moving toward us and “redshifted” for objects moving away from us. 28.
if spectral line wavelengths are changing for objects based on the radial velocities of those objects, how can we deduce which type of atom is responsible for a particular absorption or emission line? thought questions 29. make a list of some of the many practical consequences of maxwell’s theory of electromagnetic waves (television is one example). 30. with what type of electromagnetic radiation would you observe: a. a star with a temperature of 5800 k? b. a gas heated to a temperature of one million k? c. a person on a dark night? 31. why is it dangerous to be exposed to x-rays but not (or at least much less) dangerous to be exposed to radio waves? 32. go outside on a clear night, wait 15 minutes for your eyes to adjust to the dark, and look carefully at the brightest stars. some should look slightly red and others slightly blue. the primary factor that determines the color of a star is its temperature. which is hotter: a blue star or a red one? explain 33. water faucets are often labeled with a red dot for hot water and a blue dot for cold. given wien’s law, does this labeling make sense? 34.
suppose you are standing at the exact center of a park surrounded by a circular road. an ambulance drives completely around this road, with siren blaring. how does the pitch of the siren change as it circles around you? 35. how could you measure earth’s orbital speed by photographing the spectrum of a star at various times throughout the year? (hint: suppose the star lies in the plane of earth’s orbit.) 5 • exercises 179 36. astronomers want to make maps of the sky showing sources of x-rays or gamma rays. explain why those x-rays and gamma rays must be observed from above earth’s atmosphere. 37. the greenhouse effect can be explained easily if you understand the laws of blackbody radiation. a greenhouse gas blocks the transmission of infrared light. given that the incoming light to earth is sunlight with a characteristic temperature of 5800 k (which peaks in the visible part of the spectrum) and the outgoing light from earth has a characteristic temperature of about 300 k (which peaks in the infrared part of the spectrum), explain how greenhouse gases cause earth to warm up. as part of your answer, discuss that greenhouse gases block both incoming and outgoing infrared light.