many of these giant planets are orbiting close to their stars—astronomers have called these hot jupiters. the existence of giant planets so close to their stars was a surprise, and these discoveries have forced us to rethink our ideas about how planetary systems form. but for now, bear in mind that the doppler-shift method—which relies on the pull of a planet making its star “wiggle” back and forth around the center of mass—is most effective at finding planets that are both close to their stars and massive. these planets cause the biggest “wiggles” in the motion of their stars and the biggest doppler shifts in the spectrum. plus, they will be found sooner, since astronomers like to monitor the star for at least one full orbit (and perhaps more) and hot jupiters take the shortest time to complete their orbit. so if such planets exist, we would expect to be finding this type first. scientists call this a selection effect—where our technique of discovery selects certain kinds of objects as “easy finds.” as an example of a selection effect in everyday life, imagine you decide you are ready for a new romantic relationship in your life.
to begin with, you only attend social events on campus, all of which require a student id to get in. your selection of possible partners will then be limited to students at your college. that may not give you as diverse a group to choose from as you want. in the same way, when we first used the doppler technique, it selected massive planets close to their stars as the most likely discoveries. as we spend longer times watching target stars and as our ability to measure smaller doppler shifts improves, this technique can reveal more distant and less massive planets too. view a series of animations (https://openstax.org/l/30keplawsolarani) demonstrating solar system motion and kepler’s laws, and select animation 1 (kepler’s laws) from the dropdown playlist. to view an animation demonstrating the radial velocity curve for an exoplanet, select animation 29 (radial velocity curve for an exoplanet) and animation 30 (radial velocity curve for an exoplanet—elliptical orbit) from the dropdown playlist.
link to learning 21.4 • planets beyond the solar system: search and discovery 719 [image: astronomy_openstax_page737_img1.jpeg] transiting planets the second method for indirect detection of exoplanets is based not on the motion of the star but on its brightness. when the orbital plane of the planet is tilted or inclined so that it is viewed edge-on, we will see the planet cross in front of the star once per orbit, causing the star to dim slightly; this event is known as transit. figure 21.19 shows a sketch of the transit at three time steps: (1) out of transit, (2) the start of transit, and (3) full transit, along with a sketch of the light curve, which shows the drop in the brightness of the host star. the amount of light blocked—the depth of the transit—depends on the area of the planet (its size) compared to the star. if we can determine the size of the star, the transit method tells us the size of the planet. figure 21.19 planet transits. as the planet transits, it blocks out some of the light from the star, causing a temporary dimming in the brightness of the star.
the top figure shows three moments during the transit event and the bottom panel shows the corresponding light curve: (1) out of transit, (2) transit ingress, and (3) the full drop in brightness. the interval between successive transits is the length of the year for that planet, which can be used (again using kepler’s laws) to find its distance from the star. larger planets like jupiter block out more starlight than small earthlike planets, making transits by giant planets easier to detect, even from ground-based observatories. but by going into space, above the distorting effects of earth’s atmosphere, the transit technique has been extended to exoplanets as small as mars. e x a m p l e 2 1 . 1 transit depth in a transit, the planet’s circular disk blocks the light of the star’s circular disk. the area of a circle is πr2. the amount of light the planet blocks, called the transit depth, is then given by now calculate the transit depth for a star the size of the sun with a gas giant planet the size of jupiter. solution the radius of jupiter is 71,400 km, while the radius of the sun is 695,700 km.