since stars with higher masses evolve more quickly, we can find clusters in which massive stars have already completed their main-sequence phase of evolution and become red giants, while stars of lower mass in the same cluster are still on the main sequence, or even—if the cluster is very young—undergoing pre-main- sequence gravitational contraction. we can see many stages of stellar evolution among the members of a single cluster, and we can see whether our models can explain why the h–r diagrams of clusters of different ages look the way they do. the three basic types of clusters astronomers have discovered are globular clusters, open clusters, and stellar associations. their properties are summarized in table 22.3. as we will see in the next section of this chapter, globular clusters contain only very old stars, whereas open clusters and associations contain young stars.
characteristics of star clusters characteristic globular clusters open clusters associations number in the galaxy 150 thousands thousands location in the galaxy halo and central bulge disk (and spiral arms) spiral arms diameter (in light-years) 50–450 <30 100–500 mass msun 104–106 102–103 102–103 table 22.3 explain how star clusters help us understand the stages of stellar evolution list the different types of star clusters and describe how they differ in number of stars, structure, and age 748 22 • stars from adolescence to old age access for free at openstax.org characteristic globular clusters open clusters associations number of stars 104–106 50–1000+ 102–104 color of brightest stars red red or blue blue luminosity of cluster (lsun) 104–106 102–106 104–107 typical ages billions of years a few hundred million years to, in the case of unusually large clusters, more than a billion years up to about 107 years table 22.3 globular clusters globular clusters were given this name because they are nearly symmetrical round systems of, typically, hundreds of thousands of stars.
the most massive globular cluster in our own galaxy is omega centauri, which is about 16,000 light-years away and contains several million stars (figure 22.6). note that the brightest stars in this cluster, which are red giants that have already completed the main-sequence phase of their evolution, are red-orange in color. these stars have typical surface temperatures around 4000 k. as we will see, globular clusters are among the oldest parts of our milky way galaxy. figure 22.6 omega centauri. (a) located at about 16,000 light-years away, omega centauri is the most massive globular cluster in our galaxy. it contains several million stars. (b) this image, taken with the hubble space telescope, zooms in near the center of omega centauri. the image is about 6.3 light-years wide. the most numerous stars in the image, which are yellow-white in color, are main-sequence stars similar to our sun. the brightest stars are red giants that have begun to exhaust their hydrogen fuel and have expanded to about 100 times the diameter of our sun. the blue stars have started helium fusion.
(credit a: modification of work by nasa, esa and the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura); credit b: modification of work by nasa, esa, and the hubble sm4 ero team) what would it be like to live inside a globular cluster? in the dense central regions, the stars would be roughly 22.2 • star clusters 749 [image: astronomy_openstax_page767_img1.jpeg] a million times closer together than in our own neighborhood. if earth orbited one of the inner stars in a globular cluster, the nearest stars would be light-months, not light-years, away. they would still appear as points of light, but would be brighter than any of the stars we see in our own sky. the milky way would probably be difficult to see through the bright haze of starlight produced by the cluster. about 150 globular clusters are known in our galaxy. most of them are in a spherical halo (or cloud) surrounding the flat disk formed by the majority of our galaxy’s stars. all the globular clusters are very far from the sun, and some are found at distances of 60,000 light-years or more from the main disk of the milky way.