redshifts: the key to quasars the answer came when astronomers obtained visible-light spectra of two of those faint “blue stars” that were strong sources of radio waves (figure 27.2). spectra of these radio “stars” only deepened the mystery: they had emission lines, but astronomers at first could not identify them with any known substance. by the 1960s, astronomers had a century of experience in identifying elements and compounds in the spectra of stars. elaborate tables had been published showing the lines that each element would produce under a wide range of conditions. a “star” with unidentifiable lines in the ordinary visible light spectrum had to be something completely new. figure 27.2 typical quasar. the arrow in this image marks the quasar known by its catalog number, pks 1117-248. note that nothing in this image distinguishes the quasar from an ordinary star. its spectrum, however, shows that it is moving away from us at a speed of 36% the speed of light, or 67,000 miles per second. in contrast, the maximum speed observed for any star is only a few hundred miles per second.
(credit: modification of work by wiyn telescope, kitt peak national observatory, noao) in 1963 at caltech’s palomar observatory, maarten schmidt (figure 27.3) was puzzling over the spectrum of one of the radio stars, which was named 3c 273 because it was the 273rd entry in the third cambridge catalog of radio sources (part (b) of figure 27.3). there were strong emission lines in the spectrum, and schmidt recognized that they had the same spacing between them as the balmer lines of hydrogen (see radiation and spectra). but the lines in 3c 273 were shifted far to the red of the wavelengths at which the balmer lines are normally located. indeed, these lines were at such long wavelengths that if the redshifts were attributed to the doppler effect, 3c 273 was receding from us at a speed of 45,000 kilometers per second, or about 15% the speed of light! since stars don’t show doppler shifts this large, no one had thought of considering high redshifts to be the cause of the strange spectra.
928 27 • active galaxies, quasars, and supermassive black holes access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page946_img1.jpeg] figure 27.3 quasar pioneers and quasar 3c 273. (a) maarten schmidt (left), who solved the puzzle of the quasar spectra in 1963, shares a joke in this 1987 photo with allan sandage, who took the first spectrum of a quasar. sandage was also instrumental in measuring the value of hubble’s constant. (b) this is the first quasar for which a redshift was measured. the redshift showed that the light from it took about 2.5 billion years to reach us. despite this great distance, it is still one of the quasars closest to the milky way galaxy. note also the faint streak going toward the upper left from the quasar. some quasars, like 3c 273, eject super-fast jets of material. the jet from 3c 273 is about 200,000 light-years long.
(credit a: modification of work by andrew fraknoi; credit b: modification of work by esa/hubble/nasa) the puzzling emission lines in other star-like radio sources were then reexamined to see if they, too, might be well-known lines with large redshifts. this proved to be the case, but the other objects were found to be receding from us at even greater speeds. their astounding speeds showed that the radio “stars” could not possibly be stars in our own galaxy. any true star moving at more than a few hundred kilometers per second would be able to overcome the gravitational pull of the galaxy and completely escape from it. (as we shall see later in this chapter, astronomers eventually discovered that there was also more to these “stars” than just a point of light.) it turns out that these high-velocity objects only look like stars because they are compact and very far away. later, astronomers discovered objects with large redshifts that appear star-like but have no radio emission. observations also showed that quasars were bright in the infrared and x-ray bands too, and not all these x-ray or infrared-bright quasars could be seen in either the radio or the visible-light bands of the spectrum.