this effect is not just a feeling you have: if you stood on a scale in such an elevator, you could measure your weight changing (you can actually perform this experiment in some science museums). figure 24.3 your weight in an elevator. in an elevator at rest, you feel your normal weight. in an elevator that accelerates as it descends, you would feel lighter than normal. in an elevator that accelerates as it ascends, you would feel heavier than normal. if an evil villain cut the elevator cable, you would feel weightless as you fell to your doom. in a freely falling elevator, with no air friction, you would lose your weight altogether. we generally don’t like to cut the cables holding elevators to try this experiment, but near-weightlessness can be achieved by taking an airplane to high altitude and then dropping rapidly for a while. this is how nasa trains its astronauts for the experience of free fall in space; the scenes of weightlessness in the 1995 movie apollo 13 were filmed in the same way.
(moviemakers have since devised other methods using underwater filming, wire stunts, and 24.1 • introducing general relativity 827 [image: astronomy_openstax_page845_img1.jpeg] computer graphics to create the appearance of weightlessness seen in such movies as gravity and the martian.) watch how nasa uses a “weightless” environment (https://openstax.org/l/30nasaweightra) to help train astronauts. another way to state einstein’s idea is this: suppose we have a spaceship that contains a windowless laboratory equipped with all the tools needed to perform scientific experiments. now, imagine that an astronomer wakes up after a long night celebrating some scientific breakthrough and finds herself sealed into this laboratory. she has no idea how it happened but notices that she is weightless. this could be because she and the laboratory are far away from any source of gravity, and both are either at rest or moving at some steady speed through space (in which case she has plenty of time to wake up). but it could also be because she and the laboratory are falling freely toward a planet like earth (in which case she might first want to check her distance from the surface before making coffee).
what einstein postulated is that there is no experiment she can perform inside the sealed laboratory to determine whether she is floating in space or falling freely in a gravitational field.1 as far as she is concerned, the two situations are completely equivalent. this idea that free fall is indistinguishable from, and hence equivalent to, zero gravity is called the equivalence principle. gravity or acceleration? einstein’s simple idea has big consequences. let’s begin by considering what happens if two foolhardy people jump from opposite banks into a bottomless chasm (figure 24.4). if we ignore air friction, then we can say that while they freely fall, they both accelerate downward at the same rate and feel no external force acting on them. they can throw a ball back and forth, always aiming it straight at each other, as if there were no gravity. the ball falls at the same rate that they do, so it always remains in a line between them. link to learning 1 strictly speaking, this is true only if the laboratory is infinitesimally small. different locations in a real laboratory that is falling freely due to gravity cannot all be at identical distances from the object(s) responsible for producing the gravitational force.
in this case, objects in different locations will experience slightly different accelerations. but this point does not invalidate the principle of equivalence that einstein derived from this line of thinking. 828 24 • black holes and curved spacetime access for free at openstax.org figure 24.4 free fall. two people play catch as they descend into a bottomless abyss. since the people and ball all fall at the same speed, it appears to them that they can play catch by throwing the ball in a straight line between them. within their frame of reference, there appears to be no gravity. such a game of catch is very different on the surface of earth. everyone who grows up feeling gravity knows that a ball, once thrown, falls to the ground. thus, in order to play catch with someone, you must aim the ball upward so that it follows an arc—rising and then falling as it moves forward—until it is caught at the other end. now suppose we isolate our falling people and ball inside a large box that is falling with them. no one inside the box is aware of any gravitational force.