the dark band is the shadow of the rings on the planet. (credit: nasa/jpl-caltech/space science institute) saturn has one anomalous cloud structure that has mystified scientists: a hexagonal wave pattern around the north pole, shown in figure 11.14. the six sides of the hexagon are each longer than the diameter of earth. winds are also extremely high on saturn, with speeds of up to 1800 kilometers per hour measured near the equator. 11.3 • atmospheres of the giant planets 381 [image: astronomy_openstax_page399_img1.jpeg] figure 11.14 hexagon pattern on saturn’s north pole. in this infrared nighttime image from the cassini mission, the path of saturn’s hexagonal jet stream is visible as the planet’s north pole emerges from the darkness of winter. (credit: nasa/jpl/university of arizona) see images of saturn’s hexagon (https://openstax.org/l/30hexagon) with exaggerated color in this brief nasa video. unlike jupiter and saturn, uranus is almost entirely featureless as seen at wavelengths that range from the ultraviolet to the infrared (see its rather boring image in figure 11.1).
calculations indicate that the basic atmospheric structure of uranus should resemble that of jupiter and saturn, although its upper clouds (at the 1-bar pressure level) are composed of methane rather than ammonia. however, the absence of an internal heat source suppresses up-and-down movement and leads to a very stable atmosphere with little visible structure. neptune differs from uranus in its appearance, although their basic atmospheric temperatures are similar. the upper clouds are composed of methane, which forms a thin cloud layer near the top of the troposphere at a temperature of 70 k and a pressure of 1.5 bars. most the atmosphere above this level is clear and transparent, with less haze than is found on uranus. the scattering of sunlight by gas molecules lends neptune a pale blue color similar to that of earth’s atmosphere (figure 11.15). another cloud layer, perhaps composed of hydrogen sulfide ice particles, exists below the methane clouds at a pressure of 3 bars. link to learning 382 11 • the giant planets access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page400_img1.jpeg] figure 11.15 neptune. the planet neptune is seen here as photographed by voyager in 1989.
the blue color, exaggerated with computer processing, is caused by the scattering of sunlight in the planet’s upper atmosphere. (credit: modification of work by nasa) unlike uranus, neptune has an atmosphere in which convection currents—vertical drafts of gas—emanate from the interior, powered by the planet’s internal heat source. these currents carry warm gas above the 1.5-bar cloud level, forming additional clouds at elevations about 75 kilometers higher. these high-altitude clouds form bright white patterns against the blue planet beneath. voyager photographed distinct shadows on the methane cloud tops, permitting the altitudes of the high clouds to be calculated. figure 11.16 is a remarkable close-up of neptune’s outer layers that could never have been obtained from earth. figure 11.16 high clouds in the atmosphere of neptune. these bright, narrow cirrus clouds are made of methane ice crystals. from the shadows they cast on the thicker cloud layer below, we can measure that they are about 75 kilometers higher than the main clouds.
(credit: modification of work by nasa/jpl) winds and weather the atmospheres of the jovian planets have many regions of high pressure (where there is more air) and low pressure (where there is less). just as it does on earth, air flows between these regions, setting up wind patterns that are then distorted by the rotation of the planet. by observing the changing cloud patterns on the jovian planets, we can measure wind speeds and track the circulation of their atmospheres. 11.3 • atmospheres of the giant planets 383 [image: astronomy_openstax_page401_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_openstax_page401_img2.jpeg] the atmospheric motions we see on these planets are fundamentally different from those on the terrestrial planets. the giants spin faster, and their rapid rotation tends to smear out of the circulation into horizontal (east-west) patterns parallel to the equator. in addition, there is no solid surface below the atmosphere against which the circulation patterns can rub and lose energy (which is how tropical storms on earth ultimately die out when they come over land). as we have seen, on all the giants except uranus, heat from the inside contributes about as much energy to the atmosphere as sunlight from the outside.