1 fault zones and plate motion after scientists mapped the boundaries between tectonic plates in earth’s crust and measured the annual rate at which the plates move (which is about 5 cm/year), we could estimate quite a lot about the rate at which the geology of earth is changing. as an example, let’s suppose that the next slippage along the san andreas fault in southern california takes place in the year 2027 and that it completely relieves the accumulated strain in this region. how much slippage is required for this to occur? solution the speed of motion of the pacific plate relative to the north american plate is 5 cm/y. that’s 500 cm (or 5 8.2 • earth’s crust 265 [image: astronomy_openstax_page283_img1.jpeg] m) per century. the last southern california earthquake was in 1857. the time from 1857 to 2027 is 170 y, or 1.7 centuries, so the slippage to relieve the strain completely would be . check your learning if the next major southern california earthquake occurs in 2047 and only relieves one-half of the accumulated strain, how much slippage will occur?
answer: the difference in time from 1857 to 2047 is 190 y, or 1.9 centuries. because only half the strain is released, this is equivalent to half the annual rate of motion. the total slippage comes to . when two continental masses are moving on a collision course, they push against each other under great pressure. earth buckles and folds, dragging some rock deep below the surface and raising other folds to heights of many kilometers. this is the way many, but not all, of the mountain ranges on earth were formed. the alps, for example, are a result of the african plate bumping into the eurasian plate. as we will see, however, quite different processes produced the mountains on other planets. once a mountain range is formed by upthrusting of the crust, its rocks are subject to erosion by water and ice. the sharp peaks and serrated edges have little to do with the forces that make the mountains initially. instead, they result from the processes that tear down mountains. ice is an especially effective sculptor of rock (figure 8.11). in a world without moving ice or running water (such as the moon or mercury), mountains remain smooth and dull.
figure 8.11 mountains on earth. the torres del paine are a young region of earth’s crust where sharp mountain peaks are being sculpted by glaciers. we owe the beauty of our young, steep mountains to the erosion by ice and water. (credit: david morrison) volcanoes volcanoes mark locations where lava rises to the surface. one example is mid ocean ridges, which are long undersea mountain ranges formed by lava rising from earth’s mantle at plate boundaries. a second major kind of volcanic activity is associated with subduction zones, and volcanoes sometimes also appear in regions where continental plates are colliding. in each case, the volcanic activity gives us a way to sample some of the material from deeper within our planet. other volcanic activity occurs above mantle “hot spots”—areas far from plate boundaries where heat is nevertheless rising from the interior of earth. one of the best-known hot spots is under the island of hawaii, where it currently supplies the heat to maintain three active volcanoes, two on land and one under the ocean.
266 8 • earth as a planet access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page284_img1.jpeg] the hawaii hot spot has been active for at least 100 million years. as earth’s plates have moved during that time, the hot spot has generated a 3500-kilometer-long chain of volcanic islands. the tallest hawaiian volcanoes are among the largest individual mountains on earth, more than 100 kilometers in diameter and rising 9 kilometers above the ocean floor. one of the hawaiian volcanic mountains, the now-dormant maunakea, has become one of the world’s great sites for doing astronomy. not all volcanic eruptions produce mountains. if lava flows rapidly from long cracks, it can spread out to form lava plains. the largest known terrestrial eruptions, such as those that produced the snake river basalts in the northwestern united states or the deccan plateau in india, are of this type. similar lava plains are found on the moon and the other terrestrial planets. 8.3 earth’s atmosphere learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: we live at the bottom of the ocean of air that envelops our planet.