the mass of the asteroids is found mostly in the larger asteroids, so to estimate the total mass we need to consider only the larger objects. suppose the three largest asteroids—ceres (1000 km in diameter), pallas (500 km in diameter), and vesta (500 km in diameter)—account for half the total mass. assume that each of these three asteroids has a density of 3 × 103 g/cm3 and calculate their total mass. multiply your result by 2 to obtain an estimate for the mass of the total asteroid belt. how does this compare with the mass of the oort cloud? 27. make a similar estimate for the mass of the kuiper belt. the three largest objects are pluto, eris, and makemake (each roughly 2000 km). in addition, assume there are eight objects (including haumea, orcus, quaoar, ixion, varuna, and charon, and objects that have not been named yet) with diameters of about 1000 km. assume that all objects have pluto’s density of 2 × 103 g/cm3. calculate twice the mass of the largest 13 objects and compare it to the mass of the main asteroid belt. 28.
what is the period of revolution about the sun for an asteroid with a semi-major axis of 3 au in the middle of the asteroid belt? 29. what is the period of revolution for a comet with aphelion at 5 au and perihelion at the orbit of earth? 474 13 • exercises access for free at openstax.org figure 14.1 planetesimals. this illustration depicts a disk of dust and gas around a new star. material in this disk comes together to form planetesimals. (credit: modification of work by university of copenhagen/lars buchhave, nasa) chapter outline 14.1 meteors 14.2 meteorites: stones from heaven 14.3 formation of the solar system 14.4 comparison with other planetary systems 14.5 planetary evolution thinking ahead imagine you are a scientist examining a sample of rock that had fallen from space a few days earlier and you find within it some of the chemical building blocks of life. how could you determine whether those “organic” materials came from space or were merely the result of earthly contamination? we conclude our survey of the solar system with a discussion of its origin and evolution.
some of these ideas were introduced in other worlds: an introduction to the solar system; we now return to them, using the information we have learned about individual planets and smaller members of the solar system. in addition, astronomers have recently discovered thousands of planets around other stars, including numerous multiplanet systems. this is an important new source of data, providing us a perspective that extends beyond our own particular (and perhaps atypical) solar system. but first, we want to look at another crucial way that astronomers learn about the ancient history of the solar system: by examining samples of primitive matter, the debris of the processes that formed the solar system some 4.5 billion years ago. unlike the apollo moon rocks, these samples of cosmic material come to us free of charge—they literally fall from the sky. we call this material cosmic dust and meteorites.
cosmic samples and the origin of the solar system 14 [image: astronomy_openstax_page493_img1.jpeg] 14.1 meteors learning objectives by the end of this section, you will be able to: as we saw in comets and asteroids: debris of the solar system, the ices in comets evaporate when they get close to the sun, together spraying millions of tons of rock and dust into the inner solar system. there is also dust from asteroids that have collided and broken up. earth is surrounded by this material. as each of the larger dust or rock particles enters earth’s atmosphere, it creates a brief fiery trail; this is often called a shooting star, but it is properly known as a meteor. observing meteors meteors are created as tiny solid particles that enter earth’s atmosphere from interplanetary space. since the particles move at speeds of many kilometers per second, friction with the air vaporizes them at altitudes between 80 and 130 kilometers. the resulting flashes of light fade out within a few seconds. these “shooting stars” got their name because at night their luminous vapors look like stars moving rapidly across the sky.