to measure the actual size of an object, you can calculate it from the angular distance if you know the distance to the object. measuring angles with your hands you can measure angles in the sky with your hands held out at arm’s-length. you can easily measure an angular distance of 1°, 5°, 10°, and 15° (see figure 14). figure 13: angles vs. width [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page24_img1.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 25 figure 14: angles by hand 1° 5° 10° 15° photo by aaron clevenson figure 15: width and distance you start at a known location, for example 0° altitude, the horizon. you then add hand measurements until you reach your object. or you could start at south, 180 ° azimuth, and add hand measurements until you reach your object. calculating the width: if you know the angular width of an object, and you know how far away it is, you can calculate its actual width in miles or kilometers. this is called triangulation and only requires basic trigonometry.
you can also calculate its distance if you know its actual width and its angular width.
equation 1: calculating width and distance definition of the tangent function: tan(𝛼) = 𝑂𝑝𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑒 𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒 𝐴𝑑𝑗𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒= 𝑂𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 𝑊𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ 𝑂𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒= 𝑌 𝑋 calculate the width of the object: 𝑌= tan(𝛼) ∗𝑋 calculate the distance to the object: 𝑋= 𝑌 tan(𝛼) [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page25_img1.jpeg] [image: astronomy_for_mere_mortals_page25_img2.png] astronomy for mere mortals – an introductory astronomy text 26 equation 1 defines the mathematical meaning of tangent.
we then use that function to calculate the object’s width or the object’s distance. we must know two of the three measurements: distance, width, and angle. we can then calculate the third value. what you see is not always what it is when you look into space, it appears that all of the stars, planets, and galaxies you see are all painted on a giant sphere far overhead. we refer to this sphere as the celestial sphere. it is an illusion. the objects are all at various distances from the earth. to see this for yourself, close one eye, hold a finger up about 6 inches from that eye, and then hold a finger from the other hand as far away from that eye as possible, but in the same direction. both fingers appear to be close together, but in reality they are over a foot apart. this is the same for objects in space; they may be aligned and appear close together, when in reality they could be many light-years apart. consider the constellation orion. on the celestial sphere the stars appear to be all at roughly the same distance (see figure 16). but as we see in figure 17, the stars are not really close together. table 3 shows their actual distances from earth.