the dependence of the radius on planet mass is also shown for a few illustrative cases—hypothetical planets made of pure iron, rock, water, or hydrogen. figure 21.25 exoplanets with known densities. exoplanets with known masses and radii (red circles) are plotted along with solid lines that show the theoretical size of pure iron, rock, water, and hydrogen planets with increasing mass. masses are given in multiples of earth’s mass. (for comparison, jupiter contains enough mass to make 320 earths.) the green triangles indicate planets in our solar system. at lower masses, notice that as the mass of these hypothetical planets increases, the radius also increases. that makes sense—if you were building a model of a planet out of clay, your toy planet would increase in size as you added more clay. however, for the highest mass planets (m > 1000 mearth) in figure 21.25, notice that the radius stops increasing and the planets with greater mass are actually smaller. this occurs because increasing the mass also increases the gravity of the planet, so that compressible materials (even rock is compressible) will become more tightly packed, shrinking the size of the more massive planet.
in reality, planets are not pure compositions like the hypothetical water or iron planet. earth is composed of a solid iron core, an outer liquid-iron core, a rocky mantle and crust, and a relatively thin atmospheric layer. exoplanets are similarly likely to be differentiated into compositional layers. the theoretical lines in figure 21.25 are simply guides that suggest a range of possible compositions. astronomers who work on the complex modeling of the interiors of rocky planets make the simplifying assumption that the planet consists of two or three layers. this is not perfect, but it is a reasonable approximation and another good example of how science works. often, the first step in understanding something new is to narrow down the range of possibilities. this sets the stage for refining and deepening our 728 21 • the birth of stars and the discovery of planets outside the solar system access for free at openstax.org [image: astronomy_openstax_page746_img1.jpeg] knowledge. in figure 21.25, the two green triangles with roughly 1 mearth and 1 rearth represent venus and earth.
notice that these planets fall between the models for a pure iron and a pure rock planet, consistent with what we would expect for the known mixed-chemical composition of venus and earth. in the case of gaseous planets, the situation is more complex. hydrogen is the lightest element in the periodic table, yet many of the detected exoplanets in figure 21.25 with masses greater than 100 mearth have radii that suggest they are lower in density than a pure hydrogen planet. hydrogen is the lightest element, so what is happening here? why do some gas giant planets have inflated radii that are larger than the fictitious pure hydrogen planet? many of these planets reside in short-period orbits close to the host star where they intercept a significant amount of radiated energy. if this energy is trapped deep in the planet atmosphere, it can cause the planet to expand. planets that orbit close to their host stars in slightly eccentric orbits have another source of energy: the star will raise tides in these planets that tend to circularize the orbits. this process also results in tidal dissipation of energy that can inflate the atmosphere.
it would be interesting to measure the size of gas giant planets in wider orbits where the planets should be cooler—the expectation is that unless they are very young, these cooler gas giant exoplanets (sometimes called “cold jupiters”) should not be inflated. but we don’t yet have data on these more distant exoplanets. exoplanetary systems as we search for exoplanets, we don’t expect to find only one planet per star. our solar system has eight major planets, half a dozen dwarf planets, and millions of smaller objects orbiting the sun. the evidence we have of planetary systems in formation also suggest that they are likely to produce multi-planet systems. the first planetary system was found around the star upsilon andromedae in 1999 using the doppler method, and many others have been found since then. if such exoplanetary system are common, let’s consider which systems we expect to find in the kepler transit data. a planet will transit its star only if earth lies in the plane of the planet’s orbit. if the planets in other systems do not have orbits in the same plane, we are unlikely to see multiple transiting objects.