1.3.1 the constellations as an aid to remembering the stars in the night sky, the ancient astronomers grouped them into constellations; representing men and women such as orion, the hunter, and cassiopeia, mother of andromeda, animals and birds such as taurus the bull and cygnus the swan and inanimate objects such as lyra, the lyre. there is no real signiﬁ cance in these stellar groupings – stars are essentially seen in random locations in the sky – though some patterns of bright stars, such as the stars of the ‘plough’ (or ‘big dipper’) in ursa major, the great bear, result from their birth together in a single cloud of dust and gas. the chart in figure 1.4 shows the brighter stars that make up the constellation of ursa major. the brightest stars in the constellation (linked by thicker lines) form what in the uk is called ‘the plough’ and in the usa ‘the big dipper’, so called after the ladle used by farmers’ wives to give soup to the farmhands at lunchtime.
on star charts the brighter stars are delineated by using larger diameter circles figure 1.4 the constellation of ursa major – the great bear. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page25_img1.jpeg] astronomy, an observational science 5 which approximates to how stars appear on photographic images. the grid lines deﬁ ne the positions of the stars on the celestial sphere as will be described below. 1.3.2 stellar magnitudes the early astronomers recorded the positions of the stars on the celestial sphere and their observed brightness. the ﬁ rst known catalogue of stars was made by the greek astronomer hipparchos in about 130–160 bc. the stars in his catalogue were added to by ptolomy and published in 150 ad in a famous work called the almagest whose catalogue listed 1028 stars. hipparchos had grouped the stars visible with the unaided eye into six magnitude groups with the brightest termed 1st magnitude and the faintest, 6th magnitude.
when accurate measurements of stellar brightness were made in the nineteenth century it became apparent that, on average, the stars of a given magnitude were approximately 2.5 times brighter than those of the next fainter magnitude and that 1st magnitude stars were about 100 times brighter than the 6th magnitude stars. (the fact that each magnitude difference showed the same brightness ratio is indicative of the fact that the human eye has a logarithmic rather than linear response to light.) in 1854, norman pogson at oxford put the magnitude scale on a quantitative basis by deﬁ ning a ﬁ ve magnitude difference (i.e., between 1st and 6th magni- tudes) to be a brightness ratio of precisely 100. if we deﬁ ne the brightness ratio of one magnitude difference as r, then a 5th magnitude star will be r times brighter than a 6th magnitude star. it follows that a 4th magnitude star will be r ! r times brighter than a 6th magnitude star and a 1st magnitude star will be r ! r ! r ! r ! r brighter than a 6th magnitude star.
however, by pogson’s deﬁ - nition, this must equal 100 so r must be the 5th root of 100 which is 2.512. the brightness ratio between two stars whose apparent magnitude differs by one magnitude is 2.512. having deﬁ ned the scale, it was necessary to give it a reference point. he ini- tially used polaris as the reference star, but this was later found to be a variable star and so vega became the reference point with its magnitude deﬁ ned to be zero. (today, a more complex method is used to deﬁ ne the reference point.) 1.3.3 apparent magnitudes it should be noted that the observed magnitude of a star tells us nothing about its intrinsic brightness. a star that appears bright in the sky could either be a faint star that happens to be very close to our sun or a far brighter star at a 6 introduction to astronomy and cosmology greater distance. as a result, these magnitudes are termed apparent magnitudes. the nominal apparent magnitudes relate to the brightness as observed with instruments having the same wavelength response as the human eye.