8.3.4 starburst galaxies starburst galaxies emit more than usual amounts of infrared light and radio waves and came to prominence when surveys of the sky were made with infrared figure 8.22 plots of visual magnitude against log10 of the period for cepheid variables in the large magellanic cloud (a) and m81 (b). [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page310_img1.jpeg] 290 introduction to astronomy and cosmology telescopes. a nearby example is m82, 12 million light years away in ursa major (figure 8.23). it appears that a close passage with m81, its neighbour in space, has triggered a rapid burst of star formation. the radiation from young stars heats up the dust in the galaxy so producing the infrared emission. sometimes, where there is less dust, ultraviolet light from the very hot stars is seen too. the hii regions where the stars are forming emit strongly in the radio part of the spec- trum so helping to produce the enhanced radio emission. amongst the stars that are born will be a small number of very massive stars that evolve quickly and then die in spectacular supernova explosions.
further radio emission then comes from the electrons accelerated to speeds close to that of light in the explosions that mark their death. in the heart of m82, hidden from optical telescopes by thick dust lanes, radio telescopes have located over 50 supernova remnants. using an array of telescopes stretching across europe some of these have been imaged. comparing images made in 1986 and 1997 astronomers found that their shells of gas were expanding at speeds of up to 20 000 km s!1. the youngest supernova exploded about 35 years ago but, hidden behind a curtain of dust, this was never seen by optical telescopes. figure 8.23 m82 in ursa major – a starburst galaxy. image: j. gallagher (university of wisconsin), m. mountain (stsci), and p. puxley (national science foundation), nasa, esa, and the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura).
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page311_img1.jpeg] galaxies and the large scale structure of the universe 291 8.3.5 active galaxies these are galaxies where some processes occurring within them make them stand out from the normal run of galaxies, often in the amount of radio emission that they produce. it was mentioned earlier that at the heart of our galaxy lies a radio source called sgr a*, one of the strongest radio sources in our galaxy. however, this would be too weak to be seen if our milky way galaxy were at a great distance and our galaxy would therefore be termed a ‘normal’ galaxy. however, there are some galaxies that emit vastly more radio emission and shine like beacons across the universe. as most of the excess emission lies in the radio part of the spectrum, these are called radio galaxies. other galaxies produce an excess of x-ray emission and, collectively, all are called active galaxies. though relatively rare, there are obviously energetic processes going on within them that make them interesting objects for astronomers to study. we believe that the cause of their bright emissions lies right at their heart in what is called an active galactic nucleus (agn).
it was mentioned earlier that we believe that there is a super-massive black hole at the centre of our galaxy. we now believe that black holes, containing up to several billion solar masses, exist at the centre of all large elliptical and spiral galaxies. in the great majority of galax- ies these are quiescent but in some, matter is currently falling into the black hole fuelling the processes that give rise to the x-ray and radio emission. as an example, the faint object spectrograph aboard the hst has observed gas in a rotating disc at a distance of ∼26 ly from the galactic centre of m84. at this distance on one side of the centre, the gas is moving towards us at speed of about 400 km s!1 (relative to the centre of the galaxy) whilst, at the same distance on other side, it is moving away from us at the same speed.