its companion, the large magellanic cloud (lmc), is usually classiﬁ ed as one too, though it shows some features of a small barred spiral. such small galaxies are not very bright so we cannot see too many but they may, in fact, be the most common type. they contain enough gas to allow star formation, but relatively less dust 284 introduction to astronomy and cosmology than found in our galaxy. in 30 doradus, often called the tarantula nebula because of its spidery appearance, the lmc has one of the largest star formation regions known. it contains many young stars; one of these gave rise to a super- nova, called 1987a, observed in february 1987 – the nearest to us for several hundred years. 8.2.6 the hubble classiﬁ cation of galaxies a schematic, called ‘hubble’s tuning fork’ is used to illustrate edwin hubble’s classiﬁ cation scheme (figure 8.19). hubble believed that, as they aged, galaxies evolved from the left end of the tuning fork toward the right. he therefore called elliptical galaxies ‘early galaxies’ and spiral galaxies ‘late galaxies’.
this idea was not correct. spiral galaxies rotate, and so have angular momentum, whilst ellipti- cal galaxies do not. there is no way that elliptical galaxies could suddenly gain angular momentum so they could not turn into spiral galaxies. it is, however, the case that the merging of spiral galaxies probably results in the formation of giant elliptical galaxies. figure 8.19 diagram summarizing the hubble galaxy classiﬁ cation scheme. image: nasa, wikipedia commons. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page305_img1.jpeg] galaxies and the large scale structure of the universe 285 8.3 the universe as our telescopes look ever further out into space, we say that we are observing our universe. assuming that the universe has an origin some time in the past, there is a limit to how far we can see due to the ﬁ nite speed of light – we cannot see further than the distance light can travel since its origin. as the universe ages, this limit increases. the part of the universe that we can see is properly called the ‘vis- ible universe’, but this is normally shortened to simply the ‘universe’.
the whole of space, of which our universe is a part, may well extend far beyond – possibly to inﬁ nity – and the totality of space is often termed the ‘cosmos’, hence the term ‘cosmology’ used to deﬁ ne the study of its origin and evolution. 8.3.1 the cosmic distance scale to understand the scale size of the universe we need to be able to measure the distances of the galaxies. key reference points in the ‘distance ladder’ are the dis- tances to the large and small magellanic clouds, two nearby irregular galaxies (figure 8.1). as we will see, a type of very bright variable star observed within them, the cepheid variables, can be used as a ‘standard candle’ to measure the distances of galaxies relative to the distances of the magellanic clouds. for this to be possible, we must ﬁ rst have an accurate measure of the distances of one or other of the magellanic clouds. estimating the precise distances to the lmc and smc has not been easy, with values varying substantially over the years.
with the occurrence of supernova 1987a in the lmc, astronomers were given a direct method to measure the dis- tance to the lmc. this was based on the time taken for the light emitted by the supernova to illuminate a distant ring of gas surrounding it. these important observations and the calculations based on them are described in slightly simpli- ﬁ ed form below and have resulted in an estimate of the distance from earth to the centre of the lmc of 52.0 ± 1.3 kpc. this, together with other observations that are in agreement, has helped deﬁ ne a new value for the zero point of the cepheid distance scale, and has greatly improved our knowledge of galactic distances. 8.3.2 using supernova 1987a to measure the distance of the large magellanic cloud some time after the supernova was ﬁ rst observed, a ring of material that had pre- viously been ejected by the progenitor star lit up as it was irradiated by ultraviolet light from the explosion.