using wien’s displacement law, temperature is given by: t ! 2.9 " 106/λpeak k (where λpeak is in nanometres) ! 2.9 " 106/500 k ! 5800 k using the total solar power output and the radius of the sun (from the diameter as determined above) we can also use the stefan–boltzmann law: our solar system 1 – the sun 49 figure 2.4 the solar spectrum showing the fraunhofer lines. the peak intensity is in the yellow part of the spectrum close to the strong pair of sodium d lines in the centre of the spectrum. e ! σat 4 ! 5.671 " 10#8 " 4 " π " (6.95 " 108)2 " t 4 so t ! {4 " 1026/[5.671 " 10#8 " 4 " π " (6.95 " 108)2]}#4 ! (4 " 1026/3.44 " 1011)#4 ! 5839 k these agree quite well, but are a little higher than the accepted value of 5780 k.
so, in summary, the main properties of the sun are: diameter ! 1391978 km mass ! 2 " 1030 kg density ! 1400 kgm#3 luminosity ! 3.86 " 1026 w surface temperature ! 5780 k 2.2.4 the fraunhofer lines in the solar spectrum and the composition of the sun in 1666, isaac newton, using a prism, showed that sunlight is composed of all the colours of the spectrum and in 1804, william wollaston observed that there appeared to be some gaps in the spectrum that looked like dark lines. later, in 1911, joseph fraunhofer mapped many of these lines with reasonable accuracy. they have thus become known as fraunhofer lines (figure 2.4). they represent wavelengths where there is a lessening of the observed solar emission and are thus called absorption lines. later, gustav kirchoff and robert bunsen found that the wavelengths of the absorption lines seen in the sun corresponded to those of the emission lines observed when the atoms of a particular element are excited.
this can be achieved by sprinkling a compound of the element into a bunsen burner ﬂ ame, when, for example, salt gives an orange colour due to a close pair of emission lines called the sodium d lines. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page70_img1.jpeg] 50 introduction to astronomy and cosmology before long, fraunhofer lines corresponding to all the known elements had been found in the sun’s spectrum except for one set of lines. it was realised that there must be an element in the sun’s atmosphere that had not then been discovered on earth. it was thus called helium after ‘helios’ the greek name for the sun. how are these lines formed? the photosphere will emit a continuous (almost black body) spectrum. the photons will then pass through the sun’s upper atmosphere, the chromosphere, where atoms can absorb photons that correspond to transi- tions between their energy levels. thus the lines, called absorption lines, will be at just the same wavelengths as the emission lines that we can observe on earth. this is where many books stop, but it cannot be quite as simple as this.
within a short while all the atoms would be in their upper energy states and the absorption would stop! in a steady state situation, the atoms must eventually return to their original states and may do so by emitting the very same wavelengths as had been absorbed – which would imply that there would be no net absorption! the atoms will then emit in random directions so only a small percentage of the re-radiated emission from the line of sight atoms will come in our direction. however, atoms over the whole face of the sun will also be emitting their photons in random directions. their emission towards us will partly balance the emission that we do not receive from the atoms in our line of sight. there is a second mechanism, called collisional de-excitation, which can prevent re-emission. before the atoms have a chance to re-emit a photon they may interact with another atom in the atmosphere and the excitation energy is turned into kinetic energy of the atoms, so heating up the sun’s atmosphere. as we will see in later chapters, observations of the lines in the spectra of stars and galaxies play a critical role in our understanding of both our galaxy and the universe.