however, if there is a component in the universe whose effect is repul- sive and increasing with the volume of space, the scale size of the universe will vary in a quite different way with time. initially, when the volume of the universe is small, gravity will dominate over dark energy and the initial expansion rate of the universe will slow – just as in the friedmann models – but there will come a point when the repulsive effects of the dark energy will equal and then overcome gravity and the universe will begin to expand at an ever increasing rate. if this is the case, distant galaxies will be further away from us than would have been the case in the friedmann models. 9.12.5 evidence for dark energy in the 1990s it became possible to measure the distance to very distant galaxies. we can estimate the distance to remote objects if we have what is called a stan- dard candle – an object of known brightness some of which have been observed at known distances nearby. hubble used such a technique to measure the distances of galaxies using cepheid variable stars of known peak brightness. these had ﬁ rst been observed in the small magellanic cloud (smc) at a known distance from us.
suppose one of these stars is observed in a distant galaxy and appears 1/10000th as bright as a similar cepheid in the smc. assuming no extinction by dust it would, from the inverse square law, be at 100 times the distance of the smc. cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 323 however, though cepheid variable stars are some of the brightest stars known, there is a limit to distances that can be measured by using them. something brighter is required. for a short time, supernovae are the brightest objects in the universe and there is one variant, called a type 1a supernova, that is believed to have well calibrated peak brightness. it might be useful to consider an analogy. imagine a ball of plutonium of less than critical mass. if one then gradually added additional plutonium uniformly onto its surface it would, at some point in time, exceed the critical mass and explode. the power of this explosion should be the same each time the experiment is carried out as a sphere of plutonium has a well deﬁ ned critical mass. as you will see, this is rather similar to what occurs when a type 1a supernova occurs.
a type 1a supernova occurs in a binary system. the more massive star of the pair will evolve to its ﬁ nal state ﬁ rst and its core may become a white dwarf about the size of the earth. later its companion will become a red giant and its size will dramatically increase. its outer layers may then be attracted onto the surface of the white dwarf whose mass will thus increase (figure 9.13). at some critical point, when its mass nears the chandrasekhar limit of roughly 1.44 times the mass of the sun, the outer layers will ignite and in the resulting thermonuclear explosion the entire white dwarf star will be consumed. as all such supernovae will explode when they reach the same total mass, it is expected that they will all have similar peak brightness (about 5 billion times brighter than the sun) and should thus make excellent standard candles. as type ia supernovae are so bright, it is possible to see them at very large distances. the brightest cepheid variable stars can be seen at distances out to about 10–20 mpc (∼32–64 million light years). type ia supernovae are approximately figure 9.13 material accreting onto a white dwarf.
image: stsci, nasa, wikipedia commons. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page344_img1.jpeg] 324 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 14 magnitudes brighter than cepheid variables, and are thus about a quarter of a million times brighter. they can thus be can be seen about 500 times further away corresponding to a distance of around 1000 mpc – a signiﬁ cant fraction of the radius of the known universe. however, supernovae are rare with perhaps one each 300 years in a typical spiral galaxy. observations are now being made of thousands of distant galaxies on a regular basis and sophisticated computer pro- grams look for supernovae events. once initially detected, observations continue to look for the characteristic light curve of a type 1a supernova which results from the radioactive decay of nickel-56; ﬁ rst to cobalt-56 and then to iron-56. hubble (and later others) plotted the apparent expansion velocity of galaxies against their distance and produced a linear plot. this plot would not be expected to continue linearly out to very great distances due to changes in the expansion rate of the universe over time.