of course the radio telescope does not look at the ground, but some radiation can be diffracted around the edge of the dish, and the struts that support the secondary reﬂ ector will also scatter radiation into the feed system of the telescope. the higher the frequencies transferred down coaxial cables from the focus the greater their loss, so the frequencies are translated downwards to lower frequencies (called down-conversion to intermediate frequencies) before transfer along cables to the laboratories where the data acquisition systems are located. in the more modern systems, the radio frequency data is sampled after initial ampliﬁ cation and then transferred along ﬁ breoptic cables carried by modulated infrared laser light. 5.12.2 radio receivers the simplest form of radio receiver detects the radio signal and measures the received signal strength. such systems initially plotted out the data on chart recorders but now, of course, computers digitize and record the data. these can figure 5.20 the contributions to the total system noise which is typically 25 k. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page204_img1.jpeg] 184 introduction to astronomy and cosmology be used to carry out surveys of the radio sky.
as the radio telescope scans across a strong radio source, the received signal strength will rise to a maximum and then fall, plotting out a typically gaussian shape on the chart. this is the beam width that can be calculated from the same equation that was used to calculate the resolution of an optical telescope. if we consider a typical scenario, that of using the 76-m lovell telescope at a wavelength of 21 cm then: beam width ! ∆θ ! 1.22 λ/d ! 1.22 " 0.21/76 rad ! 3.4 " 10#3 rad ! 3.4 " 10#3 " 57.3 " 60 arcmin ! 11.6 arcmin you can immediately see that the effective resolution of even the third largest fully steerable telescope in the world is ∼12 times less than the human eye at visible wavelengths! in fact this is an underestimate of the actual beam width as the feed of the antenna will not collect waves reﬂ ected from towards the edge of the dish as efﬁ ciently as from its centre.
this means that the effective diameter of the dish is smaller than its actual size, and this can be compensated for by using a larger constant in the equation for the beam width. a value of 1.6 rather than 1.22 is appropriate, giving a beam width for the lovell telescope at 21cm wavelength of ∼15 arcmin. 5.12.3 telescope designs the lovell telescope is a prime focus design, where the receiver is placed directly at the focus of the primary reﬂ ector (figure 5.21). however, most modern telescopes use a cassegrain conﬁ guration as in figure 5.22. one advantage is that in the region of the focal point, which is behind the primary reﬂ ector, it is possible to locate a ‘carousel’ supporting a number of receivers each of which can be brought to the focal point by simply and quickly rotating the carousel. this gives what is termed ‘frequency ﬂ exibility’. it should be pointed out that a cassegrain design is not well suited for low frequencies as the size of the secondary reﬂ ector has to become prohibitively large.
in some telescopes the secondary mirror can be replaced by a primary focus box, and in others a dielectric ‘lens’ is used above the feed at the cassegrain focus to improve the efﬁ ciency. at very low frequencies, a primary focus system is mandatory; which is why nasa, whose space tracking radio telescopes are of cassegrain design, asked for the use of the (prime focus) lovell telescope in attempts to receive signals directly from two space probes, lost at mars, which should have been transmitting at the frequencies just above 400 mhz. observing the universe 185 the shape of large parabolic antennas such as the 100-m effelsberg tele- scope in germany and the 105-m green bank telescope in west virginia, usa will distort as their elevation changes due to changes in the gravitational forces acting on the structure (figure 5.23). both telescopes employ tech- niques to mitigate these effects. the effelsberg telescope uses a novel method which allows the shape to distort, but always to a surface with an accurate parabolic shape. the position of the focus will vary in elevation so the feed is moved to follow the focal point.