1 000 000 ev), the masses are: neutron ! 939.56563 mev proton ! 938.27231 mev electron ! 0.51099906 mev 7.10 neutron stars and black holes what remains from this cataclysmic stellar explosion depends on the mass of the collapsing core. when stars, whose total mass is greater than ∼8 solar masses but less than ∼12 solar masses, collapse the result is a neutron star – the core being supported by neutron degeneracy pressure as described above. the typical mass of such a neutron star would be ∼1.4 solar masses so that it is, in effect, a giant nucleus containing ∼1057 neutrons. it will have a radius between 10 km and 15 km – the theoretical models are not all that precise. assuming a radius of 10 km, the average density would be 6.65 " 1014 g cm#3 – more than that of an atomic nucleus!
gravity at the surface would be intense; for a 1.4 solar mass star with a radius of 10 km, the acceleration due to gravity at the surface would be 190 billion times that on the surface of the earth and the speed of an object having fallen from a height of 1 m onto the surface would be 6.88 million km h#1! a simple newtonian calculation of the escape velocity from the surface gives a value of 0.643c. this implies that both special and general relativity need to be invoked when consider- ing neutron stars. the structure of a neutron star is very complex; part may even be in the form of a superﬂ uid sea of neutrons which will thus have no viscosity. this can give rise to an observable consequence as will be described later. stellar evolution – the life and death of stars 251 a neutron star may have an outer crust of heavy nuclei, the majority being of iron and nickel. within this is an inner crust containing elements such as krypton, superﬂ uid neutrons and relativistic degenerate electrons. the inner crust overlays an interior of superﬂ uid neutrons intermixed with superconducting protons and relativistic degenerate electrons.
finally there may be a core of pions or other elementary particles (figure 7.11). like white dwarfs, neutron stars become smaller and denser with increasing mass, but there will become a point when the neutron degeneracy pressure can no longer support the mass of the star. so, in an analogous manner to the chandrasekhar limit for the maximum mass of a white dwarf, there is a limit, believed to be about 3 solar masses, beyond which the collapse continues to form a black hole as will be discussed in section 7.13. stars rotate as, for example, our sun which rotates once every ∼25 days at its equator. the core of a star will thus have angular momentum. as the core collapses, much of this must be conserved (some is transferred to the surrounding material), so the neutron star that results will be spinning rapidly with rotational periods of perhaps a few milliseconds. the neutron star will also be expected to have a very intense magnetic ﬁ eld. this rotating ﬁ eld has observational consequences that have allowed us to discover neutron stars and investigate their properties. when the neutron star is ﬁ rst born its surface temperature may approach 1011 k.
it initially cools by emitting neutrinos and antineutrinos – an interest- ing process that lasts about a day. a neutron decays to a proton, electron and an antineutrino. the proton then combines with an electron to give a neutron and a neutrino – a sort of merry-go-round during which the neutrinos carry away energy and cool the star down to about 109 k. neutrinos carry away much of the star’s energy for about 1000 years whilst the surface temperature falls to a few million kelvin. photons – in the form of x-rays – then carry energy away from the figure 7.11 cross-section of a neutron star. outer (solid) crust: nuclei of iron and nickel; inner crust: nuclei, superﬂ uid electrons and electrons; outer core: superﬂ uid neutrons, superconducting protons and electrons; inner core: condensed pions, kaons and quark matter? [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page272_img1.jpeg] 252 introduction to astronomy and cosmology surface which stays close to 1 million k for the next thousand years. its luminosity will then be comparable with that of our sun.