(assume both stars act as black bodies and convert a similar percentage of their mass into energy.) 10. a star has a surface temperature twice that of our sun. calculate how much energy each square metre of it surface will radiate compared with that of the sun. the star has a mass 3 times that of our sun and has a similar density. calculate its radius and hence surface area compared with that of the sun. hence, calculate how much more energy it radiates relative to the sun and estimate its lifetime compared with the sun. stellar evolution – the life and death of stars we have seen how stars are formed and how our sun burns hydrogen to helium whilst lying on the main sequence. this chapter will look at how stars in differ- ent mass ranges evolve, both on the main sequence and during the later stages of their life, and describe the remnants left when they die: white dwarfs, neutron stars and black holes. the distinction between low, mid, and high mass stars seem somewhat arbitrary in the literature, so the mass ranges have been speciﬁ ed in the headings to follow.
7.1 low mass stars: 0.05–0.5 solar masses for a collapsing mass of gas to become a star, nuclear fusion has to initiate in its core. this requires a temperature of ∼10 million k and this can only be reached when the contracting mass is greater than ∼1029 kg, about 1/12 the mass of the sun, or 80 times that of jupiter. in low mass stars the conversion of hydrogen to helium by nuclear fusion is the same as in our sun. however, in stars of greater mass nuclear fusion only con- verts ∼10% of the mass of the star (that residing in its core), whilst in the lowest mass stars it is thought that convection currents that mix the star’s interior will allow much of the star’s mass to undergo nuclear fusion so increasing its lifetime on the main sequence – a period which is signiﬁ cantly longer than the present age of the universe. we thus have no direct observational evidence of what hap- pens when fusion ceases in such stars and can only use computer modelling to investigate what might happen.
we will see that in order for helium to fuse into heavier elements, temperatures of order 100 million k are required, and this requires sufﬁ cient mass in the star’s enve- lope to provide the required pressure to enable such temperatures to be reached. in stars of mass less than 0.5 solar masses there is simply not enough pressure to give the temperatures that would allow helium fusion to begin. consequently, when nuclear fusion, converting hydrogen to helium, ﬁ nally ceases – and modelling of a chapter 7 introduction to astronomy and cosmology ian morison © 2008 john wiley & sons, ltd 232 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 0.1 solar mass red dwarf suggests that this might be after 6 trillion years – the star will slowly collapse over a period of several hundred billion years to form what is called a white dwarf. over many trillions of years, the white dwarf will cool until its surface temperature is below that at which signiﬁ cant light is emitted and the inert remnant will become a black dwarf.
no white dwarfs derived from low mass stars yet exist, but they will be discussed in detail in the next section as their evolu- tion also produces white dwarfs which can now be observed. 7.2 mid mass stars: 0.5–∼8 solar masses all stars in this range will have a common end state in the form of a white dwarf. there is, however, a difference in the process of nuclear fusion from hydrogen to helium in stars above and below ∼2 solar masses. for stars with mass less than ∼2 solar masses, like our sun, the bulk of their energy is produced by the proton–proton cycle described in chapter 2. how- ever, there is a more complex process called the carbon–nitrogen–oxygen (cno) cycle that provides 1–2% of the sun’s total energy output (figure 7.1). in stars figure 7.1 the carbon–nitrogen–oxygen cycle. image: wikipedia commons.