john flamsteed had observed it at least six times in 1690 and given it the star designation 34 tauri whilst the french astronomer, pierre lemonnier, observed uranus at least 12 times between 1750 and 1769. william herschel had come to england from hanover in germany where his father, isaac, was an oboist in the band of the hanoverian foot guards. as well as giving his third child, freidrich wilhelm herschel, a thorough grounding in music he gave him an interest in the heavens. when 15 years old, william entered the band as an oboist and violinist and ﬁ rst came to england in 1755 when the foot guards were sent to help defend it from a feared french invasion. he soon returned to hanover but in 1757, as the city was overrun by the french, he and his brother jacob came to england for a second time. jacob returned to hanover to take up a position in the court orchestra but his brother, who had anglicized his christian names to frederick william, stayed to take up the position of instructor to the band of the durham militia.
following a short period as a concert manager in leeds he was offered the post of organist at the octagon chapel in bath where he set up home. after some years he was able to persuade his family to allow his sister caroline to come to bath to act as his housekeeper. she had been acting as a servant in her father’s house and william had to pay his father an allowance so that he could pay for a replacement! 118 introduction to astronomy and cosmology she repaid william’s kindness with great devotion, giving up a career as a singer in order to assist him, and later became a signiﬁ cant astronomer in her own right. william’s interest in astronomy increased and he became very unsatisﬁ ed with the telescopes that he could buy so decided that he would make a reﬂ ecting tele- scope of his own. in those days, the mirrors were cast in speculum metal – an alloy of two parts copper and one of tin – and he made the castings in the kitchen of his house. occasionally the mould would break and the molten metal would crack the stone ﬂ oor.
by 1778, he had built an excellent telescope having a mirror of just over 6 in. (150 mm) in diameter and began to make a survey of the whole sky. on the night of march 13, 1781 he observed an object that did not have the appearance of a star and he ﬁ rst thought that it was a comet: ‘the power i had on when i ﬁ rst saw the comet was 227. from experience i know that the diameters of the ﬁ xed stars are not proportionally magniﬁ ed with higher powers, as planets are; therefore i now put the powers at 460 and 932, and found that the diameter of the comet increased in proportion to the power, as it ought to be, on the supposition of its not being a ﬁ xed star, while the diameters of the stars to which i compared it were not increased in the same ratio.
moreover, the comet being magniﬁ ed much beyond what its light would admit of, appeared hazy and ill-deﬁ ned with these great powers, while the stars preserved that lustre and distinctness which from many thousand observations i knew they would retain.’ observations over the following months showed that it did not have the highly elliptical or parabolic orbit of a typical comet and that it was in a nearly circular orbit having a semi-major axis of just over 19 au. it soon became apparent why herschel had seen that it was a planetary body whilst others had not. side by side comparisons with telescopes in use by others conﬁ rmed its far higher image quality – herschel had proven to be a superb tele- scope maker! uranus has a maximum angular size of 4.1 arcsec and, as the author has observed with an excellent telescope just a little smaller than herschel’s, it appears as a tiny greenish-blue disc. however, unless a telescope has well ﬁ gured optics this disc would be very hard to distinguish from a star.