the longest in recent times was observed by many from hawaii on july 11, 1991 when totality lasted 6 min 53 s. figure 2.16 the eclipse track during the solar eclipse of march 2006. image: fred espernak, nasa. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page89_img1.jpeg] our solar system 1 – the sun 69 it is not a coincidence that the dates within the year are so close. the earth is at aphelion on july 4 so the longest periods of totality will occur close to that date. the ancients observed that sets of eclipses, solar and lunar, recurred every 18 years 11 days and 8 h – a time period called the saros. as a result of the one- third of a day in this period, each set of eclipses is observed one-third of the way around the globe at successive saros periods. solar eclipses will thus be seen in the same region of the earth after three saros periods (54 years and 34 days).
2.9.1 two signiﬁ cant solar eclipses the eclipses of 1919 and 1922 played a signiﬁ cant role in the history of science. as was described in chapter 1, einstein predicted that the sun’s mass would distort the space–time around it and thus light would travel along curved lines when passing close by. one observable effect that would allow his radical theory to be tested was that this should cause the positions of stars, when seen in close prox- imity to the sun, to be shifted from their true positions. (it should be noted that newton also predicted, for different reasons, that light waves should be bent when passing the sun, but the effect due to the distortion of space–time in einstein’s theory is twice that predicted by newton’s theory.) in essence the plan was simple. prior to a solar eclipse, take images of the sky where the sun would be during totality. then take the same images during totality – the only time when stars can be seen close to the sun’s position – and compare the positions of the stars.
close to the limb einstein’s theory predicts a shift of just 1.75 arcsec (while newton’s suggested 0.8 arcsec). sir arthur eddington led the british eclipse expedition to the atlantic island of principe in order to observe the total eclipse of the sun in may 1919, whilst a second set of observations were made from sobral in brazil (figure 2.17). the telescopes used thus had to be portable and this limited their accuracy. the control images obviously had to be taken at night when it would have been colder than during the day time. even disregarding these problems, the experiment was not easy. the anticipated deﬂ ection of stars nearby the sun (a maximum of 1.75 arcsec) has to be compared with the typical size of a stellar image as observed from the ground (due to atmospheric turbulence) of 1–2 arcsec. the data from the observations were not quite as conclusive as was implied at the time. the telescope at principe was used to take 16 plates, but partial cloud reduced their quality. two usable plates from the telescope on principe, though of a poor quality, suggested a mean of 1.62 arcsec.
two telescopes were used at sobral where conditions were superb; sadly, however, the focus of the main instrument shifted, probably due to tem- perature changes, and the stellar images were not clear. they were thus difﬁ cult to measure and produced a result of ∼0.93 arcsec. a smaller 10 cm instrument did, however, produce eight clear photographic plates and these showed a mean 70 introduction to astronomy and cosmology deviation of 1.98 !/" 0.12 arcsec. if all the data had been included, the results would have been inconclusive, but eddington, with little justiﬁ cation, discounted the results obtained from the larger sobral telescope and gave extra weight to the results from principe (which he had personally recorded). on november 6 that year the astronomer royal and the president of the royal society declared the figure 2.17 a poster from the time of the 1919 solar eclipse. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page91_img1.jpeg] our solar system 1 – the sun 71 evidence was decisively in favour of einstein’s theory.