they have masses about half that of our sun, pulsate with periods of 0.2–2 days and are in the phase of their life when they are burning helium into carbon. they are typically 40–50 times brighter than our sun, and their brightness is related to the period with which they vary in brightness. this gives them the status of a standard candle. suppose we have found by parallax the distance of a nearby rr lyrae variable which has a period of 1 day. if we then observed a distant rr lyrae star, having the same period but appearing 10 000 time fainter than the nearby one, we could assume that they had the same intrinsic brightness and so, using the inverse square law, the more distant star would be 100 times further away. another type of very bright variable stars, called cepheid variables, which lie higher in the h–r diagram and are some of the brightest stars that we can figure 7.4 the region where variable stars are found in the h–r diagram.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page259_img1.jpeg] stellar evolution – the life and death of stars 239 observe, have played a very important role in determining the size of the universe and will be discussed in detail in chapter 8. 7.4 planetary nebula finally it appears that the star becomes so unstable that the outer parts of the star are blown off to form what is called a planetary nebula surrounding the core remnant. planetary nebulae are some of the most beautiful objects that we observe in the universe and many, such as the ring and dumbbell nebulae, may be observed with a small telescope (figure 7.5). planetary nebulae are relatively common with over 1500 known, but it is expected that many more, perhaps over 50 000, will exist in the galaxy but are hidden by the dust lanes in our galaxy. the name planetary nebulae is, of course, a misnomer as they have nothing to do with planets, but many do have a disc-like appearance. they are large tenu- ous shells of gas which are expanding outwards at velocities of a few tens of kilometres per second.
they also contain some dust and have masses of typically one-tenth to one-ﬁ fth of a solar mass. about 10 planetary nebulae are thought to be formed each year so the interstellar medium is being enriched by around 1 solar mass per year. figure 7.5 planetary nebulae. in all cases, the stellar remnant can be seen at the centre. image: ic 418, cat’s eye and ring nebulae, hubble space telescope, nasa; abell 39, noao, nsf. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page260_img1.jpeg] 240 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 7.5 white dwarfs at the centre of a planetary nebula lies a white or blue-white star. they are not very bright so that relatively large telescopes are required to see them visually. (the author has once, using a 16 in. telescope under perfect conditions, observed the star at the centre of the ring nebula.) this star is approaching the ﬁ nal stage of its life when it will become a ‘white dwarf’. once nuclear reactions have ceased, what is left at the centre of the star will contract under gravity.
it is composed mainly of carbon and oxygen, and devoid of its outer layers through a combina- tion of the intense stellar winds and the ejection of a planetary nebula. the fact that contraction ﬁ nally ceases is due to a quantum-mechanical effect known as degeneracy pressure. in 1926, r.h. fowler realised that, as a result of the pauli exclusion principle, no more than two electrons could occupy a given energy state. as the allowed energy levels ﬁ ll up, the electrons begin to provide a pressure – the electron degeneracy pressure – which ﬁ nally halts the contraction. this pressure only depends on density, not temperature, and this has the interesting result that the greater the mass of the white dwarf, the less its radius! a further consequence of being supported by electron degeneracy pressure is that there is a limiting mass which cannot be exceeded. this depends on the composition of the star; for a mix of carbon and oxygen, it turns out to be ∼ .4 solar masses. this result was published in 1931 by subramanyan chandrasekhar when he was only 19 years old!