5.4.2 the eﬀ ect of diﬀ raction on the resolution of a telescope if one considers a 150 mm telescope observing in green light of 5.5 " 10#7 m wavelength, one gets a size for the airy disc of 4.4 " 10#6 rad which is 0.9 arcsec: ∆θ ! 1.22 λ/d ! 1.22 " 5.5 " 10#7/0.15 rad ! 4.4 " 10#6 rad ! 4.4 " 10#6 " 57.3 " 3600 arcsec ! 0.9 arcsec larger aperture telescopes will theoretically give higher resolutions but, in practice the resolution is usually limited by what is called the ‘seeing’ – a func- tion of turbulence in the atmosphere. the atmosphere contains cells of gas with slightly differing refractive indices which are carried high above the telescope by the wind and act rather like the glass used for screens which blur what is seen beyond. a star is effectively a point source and should theoretically have an image size given by the airy disc of the telescope aperture.
in practice a stellar image 168 introduction to astronomy and cosmology size as seen from the uk will probably be or order 2–3 arcsec across and is highly unsteady. this is one reason why professional telescopes are located on high mountains on islands such as la palma in the atlantic ocean and hawaii in the paciﬁ c ocean. at such locations, there is far less atmosphere above the telescope and the air tends to be less turbulent as it has been ﬂ owing over the sea. under the best conditions the seeing might limit the resolution to half an arcsecond, so larger aperture telescopes will see more detail but not signiﬁ cantly more than a telescope whose aperture is ∼400 cm across. the best location for an optical telescope is in space, as in the case of the hubble space telescope, where its full resolution of 1/20th of an arcsecond at visible wavelengths may be realised. the turbulence of the atmosphere and hence seeing varies from night to night. in bad seeing the image of a star will appear bloated and the moon can appear to be boiling! on such nights the image quality will be totally determined by the atmosphere.
but, rarely, the atmosphere can be still and then the aperture, type of telescope and the quality of the optics will determine what you can see. the seeing tends to have more effect on large aperture telescopes, so when the seeing is not good a smaller telescope may actually give better views of the planets. 5.5 the magniﬁ cation of a telescope the objective of a telescope, be it lens or mirror, produces an image in its focal plane. here a charge-coupled device (ccd) array might be placed to produce an image of the object or the image might be viewed by using an eyepiece. the eyepiece works like a magnifying glass enabling one to view the image in detail. eyepieces have focal lengths ranging from ∼2.5 up to ∼55 mm. the magniﬁ cation of a telescope is simply obtained by dividing the focal length of the objective by the focal length of the eyepiece, so a 12 mm focal length eyepiece coupled with a 1200 mm focal length objective gives a magniﬁ cation of !100. it is also possible to place a concave lens in the light path close to the eyepiece.
this is referred to as a barlow lens, and has the effect of diverging the light cone and giving the effect of having an objec- tive of greater focal length, so providing an effective increase in magniﬁ cation for a given primary focal length. the effective focal length is usually doubled (called !2 barlows), but can be obtained with effective magniﬁ cation ratios of 2.5 or even 4. eyepieces generally give excellent performance on axis, but image quality drops off the further off axis one observes. the designer of an eyepiece will determine the diameter of the area that can be observed with the eyepiece without signiﬁ cant loss of detail and use a ‘ﬁ eld stop’ to limit the observed ﬁ eld. this then determines the area of sky that can be observed when used with a given objective. suppose that there is an object that lies away from the centre of the ﬁ eld of view by an angle of θ/2 that appears right at the edge of the image encompassed by the ﬁ eld observing the universe 169 stop of the eyepiece.