[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page199_img1.jpeg] observing the universe 179 (the southern cross) and yepun (the star sirius). one notable achievement was the ﬁ rst visual image of a planet, albeit around a brown dwarf rather than a normal star, which was observed in the infrared when using an adaptive optics system. 5.11.5 the hubble space telescope (hst) the hst (figure 5.18) was launched in april 1990 to observe the universe over a wavelength range that extends from the ultraviolet, through the visible to the near infrared; that is, from 0.12 µm in the ultraviolet to 2.4 µm in the near infrared (1 µm is 10!6 m).
the hst’s primary mirror is 2.4 m across so that in green light its angular resolution is given by: ∆θ " 1.22 λ/d " 1.22 # 5.1 # 10!7/2.4 rad " 2.5 # 10!7 rad " 3.4 # 10!3 # 57.3 # 3600 arcsec " 0.053 arcsec " ∼1/20th of an arcsecond figure 5.17 the four 8.2-m telescopes of the vlt, with the four 1.8-m auxiliary telescopes in the foreground. image: courtesy of the european southern observatory. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page200_img1.jpeg] 180 introduction to astronomy and cosmology however, this resolution would have only been met if the mirror was ground to such a precision that it would be diffraction limited and to achieve this, the mirror was one of the smoothest ever made. when placed in its orbit some 600 km above the earth, the astronomers commissioning the hst were mortiﬁ ed to ﬁ nd that it could not be focused.
the full optical system had not been tested on the ground and a problem in the test rig that controlled the shape of the primary mirror meant that the mirror suf- fered signiﬁ cant spherical aberration. the resultant image quality was very poor. the centre of the mirror was just 2 µm too shallow and, as a result, rays from the edge of the mirror came to a focus 4 cm behind that from the centre. an ideal mirror will put 84% of the light into the central disc, but the hst mirror put only ∼15% of the light in the central disc with most of the light spread over a region 1.5 arcsec across, comparable with ground based telescopes! however, rather than being a badly made mirror of the correct shape, it was a perfectly made mirror of the wrong shape! this meant that it was possible to correct the spherical aberration by introducing a correcting lens or mirror into the optical path, and this was achieved in the ﬁ rst servicing mission. it is now a virtually perfect telescope and its contribution to our understanding of the uni- verse has been immense.
one of its main legacies to astronomy will be the images of the distant universe in what are called the hubble deep field and the hubble ultra deep field showing galaxies close to the time of their formation just a billion years after the origin of the universe. 5.11.6 the future of optical astronomy plans are being made for a number of very large optical telescopes to be constructed in the twenty-ﬁ rst century which will have unprecedented sensitiv- ity. one such concept being considered is owl, the design for a 100-m optical figure 5.18 the hubble space telescope. image: space telescope science institute, nasa. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page201_img1.jpeg] observing the universe 181 telescope that would have the ability to observe details down to 1 milliarcsec. it would observe in the open air and be covered by a dome during daylight hours as shown in figure 5.19. due to the very high cost envisaged it is perhaps more likely that an optical telescope in the size range 30–60 m would be built in the coming decades.