additional laser systems control micro thrusters to counteract the forces on the spacecraft and keep its position relative to the test mass accurate to 10 nm – of order 1/100th the wavelength of light! as we will see in chapter 9, it is not possible to look back in time further than ∼380 000 years after the origin of the universe. prior to that time, the universe was sufﬁ ciently hot for photons to ionize the atoms so ﬁ lling space with free electrons which scatter light – rather like water droplets in a fog – with the result that the universe was then opaque to electromagnetic radiation. the sensitivity of lisa might actually allow us to probe even further back in time by detecting gravitational waves that were created less than one-trillionth of a second after the big bang! 5.15 questions 1. stellar magnitudes obey a logarithmic scale with the difference in brightness between a magnitude 1 star and a magnitude 6 star deﬁ ned to be exactly 100. given that the eye has a dark adapted pupil size of 5 mm, how large would a telescope aperture have to be in order to observe a star 7 magnitudes fainter than the human eye can detect? 2.
a telescope of 1000 mm focal length is provided with 32 and 11 mm plossl eyepieces along with a !2 barlow lens. what four magniﬁ cations are available? the 32 and 11 mm eyepieces have ﬁ eld stop diameters of 27 mm and 9 mm, respectively. what ﬁ elds of view would be observed with these two eyepieces? 3. a newtonian telescope has a mirror diameter of 300 mm and a focal length of 1500 mm. the tube has an external diameter of 330 mm and the focal plane is 40 mm outside the tube. (a) calculate the focal ratio. (b) calculate the minor and major axes of the minimum size of secondary mirror that should be used with this telescope. (c) what would be the magniﬁ cation when used with a 15 mm eyepiece? (d) what would be the ﬁ eld of view when used with an eyepiece having a 44 mm ﬁ eld stop? (e) what is the theoretical resolution, in arcseconds, of the telescope at the wavelength of green light, 5.1 !
10"7 m? (f) what tolerance in the manufacture of the mirror surface would you need if the maximum phase error were not to exceed 1/6 λ at this wavelength? observing the universe 203 4. the author imaged jupiter when closest to the earth last year using his 230 mm aperture, f10, schmidt–cassegrain telescope with a 170 pixels per millimetre ccd camera having an effective area of 3.9 ! 2.8 mm. to increase the image scale the effective focal ratio of the telescope was increased by a factor of 2.5 by the use of a barlow lens. (a) what was the effective focal length? (b) calculate the ﬁ eld of view covered by the ccd array. (c) estimate jupiter’s angular size given that it is in a circular orbit of radius 5.7 au, and has a diameter of 142 800 km. (1 au " 1.49 ! 108 km.) (d) assuming that jupiter’s equator lay parallel to one axis of the ccd chip, how many pixels lay across jupiter’s image?
(e) why do you think that the barlow lens was used? 5. calculate the resolution of the 2.4-m mirror of the hubble space telescope at a wavelength of 0.5 ! 10#6 m. how large would an array of radio telescopes operating at a wavelength of 0.06 m need to be to equal this resolution? 6. what would the resolution be of the square kilometre array when operating at 21 cm wavelength using baselines out to 2000 km? the properties of stars virtually all of the light that we can see in the heavens has come from the surface of a star and they are, certainly for our existence, the most important objects in the universe. the heat and light of the sun sustains life here on earth, and the life cycles of stars that existed billions of years ago produced the elements of which we are made and that of the planet on which we live. this chapter will discuss the properties of stars in general, how these are measured and where our own star, the sun, is positioned amongst them. 6.1 stellar luminosity stars have a very wide range of intrinsic luminosity – their energy output across the whole electromagnetic spectrum.