together, the twin telescopes can give full sky coverage with both sites giving a high percentage of clear weather and excellent atmospheric conditions. they have been designed to operate especially well at infrared wavelengths and to this end, their mirrors are coated with silver which reﬂ ects signiﬁ - cantly more infrared radiation than the aluminium used to coat most other telescope mirrors. as atmospheric water vapour absorbs infrared radiation both telescopes are located on high mountain tops where the air has a very low water vapour content. figure 5.14 the gemini north telescope. note the open sides of the dome to allow the telescope to remain in thermal equilibrium with the outside air. image: neelon crawford, polar fine arts, courtesy of gemini observatory and national science foundation. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page197_img1.jpeg] observing the universe 177 5.11.2 the keck telescopes the twin keck telescopes, located at a height of 4200 m at the top of mauna kea, hawaii, are the world’s largest optical and infrared telescopes (figure 5.15).
they have primary mirrors of 10 m diameter each composed of 36 hexagonal segments whose positions are adjusted (using active optics) to act as a single mirror. tele- scopes can take time to thermally stabilize to the night-time temperatures when the domes are opened, so to minimize these effects, the interior of the keck domes are chilled close to freezing point during the day. when observing, twice a second when observing, the active optics system con- trols the positions of each mirror segment to a precision of 4 nm to compensate for thermal and gravitational deformations. the keck telescopes also use an adap- tive optics system using 15 cm diameter deformable mirrors that changes their shape up to 670 times per second to cancel out atmospheric distortion, improving the image quality by a fact of ten. the keck telescopes have made a notable contribution to the detection of extra- solar planets by the ‘radial velocity’ method.
5.11.3 the south africa large telescope (salt) with a spherical 10 m mirror made up of 91 hexagonal segments, salt is the largest telescope in the southern hemisphere and its innovative design is based on the hobby-ebberly telescope at the mcdonald observatory in texas (figure 5.16). the telescope is tilted at a ﬁ xed angle of 37° from the zenith and moves only in azimuth, rotating on air bearings to point to the region of sky that is to be observed. figure 5.15 the twin keck telescopes. image: courtesy w. m. keck observatory. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page198_img1.jpeg] 178 introduction to astronomy and cosmology during the observation the telescope structure remains stationary whilst an opti- cal corrector assembly (to correct for the spherical aberration of the mirror) and instrument payload move across the top of the telescope tube to track the object being observed. the design allowed salt to be built at less than a ﬁ fth of the cost of a conventional 10-m telescope.
5.11.4 the very large telescope (vlt) the vlt is operated by the european southern observatory (eso) and consists of four 8.2-m telescopes which can either work independently or in a combined mode when it is equivalent to a single 16-m telescope – making it the largest opti- cal telescope in the world (figure 5.17). the light from the four auxiliary 1.8-m telescopes may also be combined with that from the 8.2-m telescopes to give high angular resolution imaging. it can observe over a wavelength range from the near ultraviolet up to 25 µm in the infrared. the vlt is located at the paranal observatory on cerro paranal in the atac- ama desert, northern chile, at a height of 2600 m (one of the best observing sites in the world). the four main telescopes have been given the names of objects in the sky in the mapuche language: antu (the sun), kueyen (the moon), melipal figure 5.16 the south africa large telescope. image: salt consortium.