it could be that airport radars and even very high power radars for moni- toring (their) ‘near-earth’ asteroids might exist in the long-term, and give us some chance of detecting their presence, but we should not count on it. when all these factors are evaluated and combined, the average time between the emergence of advanced civilizations in our galaxy is derived. if we ﬁ nd it hard to estimate how often intelligent civilizations arise it is equally hard to estimate the length of time over which, on average, such civilizations might attempt to communicate with us. in principle, given a stable population and power from nuclear fusion, an advanced civilization could survive for a time measured in cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 331 millions of years. often a period of 1000 years for this ‘communicating stage’ is chosen for want of anything better. this length of time is critical in trying to estimate how many other civilizations might be currently present in our galaxy. if, for example, a civilization arose once every 100 000 years – a reasonable estimate – but typically, civilizations only attempt to communicate for 1000 years, it is unlikely that more than one will be present at any given time.
if, however, on average, they remain in a communicating phase for 1 million years then we might expect that nine other civilizations would be present in our galaxy now. when the drake equation was ﬁ rst evaluated, the estimates of the numbers of other civilizations were quite high; numbers in the hundreds of thousands or even as high as 1 million were quoted. nowadays astronomers who try to evalu- ate the drake equation are far less optimistic. many estimates are in the range of 10–10 000 but there are a minority of astronomers who suspect that, at this moment in time, we might well be the only advanced civilization in our galaxy. the truth is we just do not know. it was once said with great insight that ‘the drake equation is a wonderful way of encapsulating a lot of ignorance in a small space’. absolutely true, but an obvious consequence is that we cannot say that we are alone in the galaxy. seti (see below) is our only hope of ﬁ nding out. the author’s own belief is that simple life will be widespread in the galaxy, but that few locations will keep stable temperatures for sufﬁ cient time to allow advanced civilizations to arise.
optimistically, their number might be in the tens to hundreds but it may very well be that none of these would choose to try to contact us so that we would remain in ignorance of their presence. 9.15.2 the search for extra terrestrial intelligence (seti) the seti searches, observing in the radio part of the spectrum, have, as yet, only seriously searched a tiny region of our galaxy. it will not be until the 2020s that the square kilometre array, now on the drawing board, will give us the capability to detect radio signals of realistic power from across a large part of the galaxy. it is also possible that light, rather than radio, might be the communication car- rier chosen by an alien race, but optical-seti searches, seeking out pulsed laser signals, have only just begun. in a 1959 paper in the prestigious journal nature, giuseppe cocconi and philip morrison discussed the possibilities of detecting the existence of other civilizations by radio. not only did they suggest some suitable nearby target stars, but also the optimum part of the radio spectrum in which to search for signals.
they had no way of telling whether such a search would be fruitful but ended their paper with the following sentence: ‘the probability of success (in our search for extraterrestrial life) is difﬁ cult to estimate, but if we never search, the chance of success is zero.’ 332 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 9.16 the future of the universe the accelerating expansion of the universe that is now accepted has a very interesting consequence. it used to be thought that with a slowing rate of expan- sion, as the universe became older we would see an increasing number of galaxies (as the distance we could see becomes greater). in a universe whose expansion is accelerating the exact opposite will be true – yes, we will be able to see farther out into space, but there will be increasingly less and less for us to see as the expansion carries galaxies beyond our horizon. on the large scale, the space between the galaxy clusters will be expanding – carrying them ever faster apart – but it is believed that clusters like our own local group will remain gravitationally bound and, in fact, its members will merge into one single galaxy largely made up from our own milky way galaxy and the andromeda galaxy.