mars has an albedo of 0.15 so absorbs much of the incident solar energy but its thin carbon dioxide atmosphere (about 1/100th that of the earth) is unable to trap much heat so it is now too cold for carbon/water based life forms to survive on the surface. however, in the past, when giant volcanoes were emit- ting vast amounts of gas into the atmosphere (including water vapour, carbon dioxide and methane) its temperature would have been signiﬁ cantly higher and life could, perhaps, have arisen there. 3.4 planetary atmospheres this section will discuss the formation and evolution of planetary atmospheres. in every case the planet’s original atmosphere will have come from the solar neb- ula out of which the sun and planets formed. its composition will thus have been similar to that of the sun so that it will have been largely composed of the light elements hydrogen and helium. this was the only source of the atmospheres of the outer planets but may not have contributed very much to the terrestrial plan- ets as, by the time they had formed, the solar wind of the young star would have ejected much of the solar nebula outwards beyond the inner planets.
in addition, as will be seen below, an atmosphere of light gases could not have been kept by these relatively small planets due to their relatively high surface temperatures and low gravity. consider an atmosphere made up of a number of different gases, some of light molecules, such as hydrogen and helium, and some of heavier molecules, such as carbon dioxide, ammonia and methane. the law of equipartition of energy states that all species of molecules in the atmosphere will have roughly equal kinetic energies (½mv2). this means that for a given temperature, lighter molecules with smaller masses, will have higher velocities than heavier molecules. the average kinetic energies of the gas molecules will depend on the temperature of the atmo- sphere so, in hotter atmospheres, the molecules will be moving faster. the average kinetic energy of motion of a molecule is related to the absolute temperature, t, by: 1/2mv2 ! 3/2kt where k is boltzmann’s constant which is equal to 1.38 " 10#23 m2 kg s#2 k#1. our solar system 2 – the planets 85 giving: v !
(3kt/m)1/2 for a given temperature (and hence kinetic energy), the velocity of a given mol- ecule will be inversely proportional to the square root of its molecular mass, so molecules of hydrogen (molecular mass 2) will move on average four times faster than those of oxygen (molecular mass 32). if a molecule in the upper part of an atmosphere happens to be moving upwards at a sufﬁ ciently high velocity, then it could exceed the escape velocity of the planet and so escape into space. the escape velocity depends on the mass of the planet so it should be apparent that hot, light planets might well lose all the lighter molecules that they might have once have had in their atmospheres whilst cooler, more massive planets will be able to hold on to even the lightest molecules within their atmospheres. let us calculate the average velocity for nitrogen molecules which have a mass of 4.68 " 10#26 kg: v ! [(3 " 1.38 " 10#23 " 300)/4.68 " 10#26]1/2 ! 0.515 km s#1.
so, for nitrogen (molecular mass 28) and oxygen (molecular mass 32) in the earth’s atmosphere at a temperature of ∼300 k, the typical molecular speeds are 0.52 and 0.48 km s#1, respectively. this is far smaller than the escape velocity of the earth which is 11.2 km s#1 so we would not expect these gases to escape from our atmosphere. in fact, it is not quite as simple as that. due to collisions between them, molecules do not all move at the same speed; some are faster and some slower than the average. the relative numbers of molecules at speeds around the average is given by the maxwell–boltzmann distribution. a very small fraction of the molecules in a gas have speeds considerably greater than average, with one molecule in 2 million moving faster than three times the average speed, and one in 1016 exceeding the average by more than a factor of 5. consequently, a very few molecules may be moving fast enough to escape, even when the average molec- ular speed is much less than the escape velocity.