5.12.7 the future of radio astronomy the international radio astronomical community is now building and planning the radio telescopes that will dominate the observations of the twenty-ﬁ rst century – the atacama large millimetre array (alma) and the square kilometre array (ska). alma is being constructed in the atacama desert region of chile at a height of 5000 m (figure 5.27). here there is little water vapour in the atmo- sphere above so enabling observations from 10 mm down to as little as 0.3 mm wavelengths. the 50 or more individual antennas can be spaced up to several kilometres apart giving unprecedented resolution at these short wavelengths. alma will be able to observe the clouds of gas and dust from which all the stars and galaxies in the universe form and help us to more fully understand the process of star formation. figure 5.27 artist’s impression of the atacama large millimetre array. image: european southern observatory.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page212_img1.jpeg] 192 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the ska will be built in either south africa or australia and will have an effective collecting area of 1 km2 – hence its name. it would thus have the same collecting area as 130, 100-m radio telescopes! the collecting area of the main array will, however, be made up arrays of small antennas, expected to be 15 m in size. this requires the use of more electronic systems but overall, the required collecting area can be achieved more cheaply than by the use of larger individual antennas. the ska will consist of an inner core of antennas making up a large part of the array’s total collecting area, together with outer stations arranged in a log- spiral pattern extending out to distances of 3000 km. it will thus combine high sensitivity allied to high resolution to give an instrument whose performance will greatly exceed radio telescope arrays currently in use. the ska will be a highly ﬂ exible instrument designed to address many of the most fundamental questions in astronomy.
it will be the only instrument capable of observing the universe in the period, called the ‘dark ages’, when the hydrogen and helium formed in the big bang had yet to form the ﬁ rst stars. close to the central core will be a ‘phased array’ of receiving elements capable of observing much of the sky at one time – ideal for detecting transient events – and also able to carry out several observing tasks simultaneously. the artist’s impression of the ska in figure 5.28 shows the central core at the upper right, some of the outer stations in the foreground and middle left, the phased array. phase 1 of the project, with over 10% of the total collecting area, is hoped to be completed by 2015 with ﬁ nal completion of the array in 2020. figure 5.28 artist’s impression of the central region of the ska. image: xilos studios, ska project development oﬃ ce.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page213_img1.jpeg] observing the universe 193 5.13 observing in other wavebands 5.13.1 infrared many large optical telescopes are also used to observe in the infrared region of the spectrum, but there are some dedicated telescopes, such as the united kingdom infrared telescope (ukirt) located at a height of 4194 m on mauna kea, hawaii (figure 5.29). the ukirt has a 3.8-m mirror and is equipped with a new mid infra- red eschelle spectrometer (michelle); it has been used to observe young stars which were previously hidden in cocoons of the dust and gas from which they formed. observations at ‘near infrared’ wavelengths cannot penetrate the surrounding dusty material, but michelle’s view at longer ‘mid infrared’ wavelengths reveals the young stars within. ukirt has also signiﬁ cantly advanced our understanding of brown dwarfs, mysterious objects sometimes referred to as ‘failed stars’. they are more massive than gas giant planets like jupiter, but are not quite massive enough to shine like normal stars.