for reasons which shortly become apparent, the techniques largely used to date would have found it very difﬁ cult to detect the planets of our own solar system so it should not be surprising that we have so far failed to ﬁ nd many other similar solar systems. as new techniques are used, this situation will improve, but it will be many years before we have any real idea how often solar systems like our own have arisen in the galaxy. the story of the discovery of the ﬁ rst planet to orbit a sun-like star is very interesting in its own right, but, in order to appreciate its nuances, we need ﬁ rst to understand how this, along with the great majority of planets so far detected, has been discovered. 4.1 the radial velocity (doppler wobble) method of planetary detection our own solar system gives us a good insight into this method and its strengths and weaknesses. astronomers often use, as in this book, the phrase ‘the planets orbit the sun’. this is not quite true. imagine a scale model of the solar system with sun and planets having appropriate masses and positions in their orbits from the sun. all the objects are mounted on a ﬂ at, weightless, sheet of support- ing material.
by trial and error, one could ﬁ nd a point where the model could be balanced on just one pin. this point is the centre of gravity of the solar system chapter 4 introduction to astronomy and cosmology ian morison © 2008 john wiley & sons, ltd 136 introduction to astronomy and cosmology model. the centre of gravity of the solar system is called its barycentre, and both the sun and planets rotate about this position in space (figure 4.1). as jupiter is more massive than all the other planets combined, its mass and position have a major effect on the position of the barycentre, which will thus lie a distance from the centre of the sun in the approximate direction of jupiter. how far might this be? ignoring all other planets, let us assume that the barycentre lies r km from the centre of the sun. the mass of the sun and jupiter must ‘balance’ about this point so, given r and the semi-major axis of jupiter’s orbit in km: msun ! r " mjupiter ! (777 547 199 – r) the sun, with a mass of 2 ! 1030 kg, is approximately 1000 times more massive than jupiter.
hence: 1000 r # r " 777 547 199 so, r " 777 547 199/1001 " 776 770 km the equatorial radius of the sun is 695 500 km so, if jupiter is its only planet, the barycentre of the solar system would actually lie outside the sun. when all of the major planets lie on one side of the sun, as happened in the 1980s – allowing the voyager spacecraft missions to the outer planets – the barycentre is further from the sun’s centre and when jupiter is on the opposite side to the other planets it is nearer figure 4.1 the change in wavelength of a spectral line as the star orbits the barycentre of its solar system. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page157_img1.jpeg] extra-solar planets 137 the sun’s centre. on average, the barycentre is at a distance of ∼1.25 solar radii from the sun’s centre, varying between extremes of ∼0.3 and 2 solar radii. suppose that we observed the solar system from a point at a great distance in the plane of the solar system.
we could not see the planets – their reﬂ ected light would be swamped by the light from the sun – but, at least in principle, we could detect their presence. due to the sun’s motion around the barycentre of the solar system, it would at times be moving towards us and at other times moving away from us. if we could precisely measure the position of the spectral lines in the solar spectrum we could measure the changing doppler shift and convert that into a velocity of approach or recession. the solar system as a whole might, of course, be moving either away or towards us so we would see a cyclical change in velocity about a mean value. again, for the sake of simplicity, let us assume that our solar system has only one planet (jupiter). the sun would be seen to rotate around the barycentre once every 11.86 years, the period of jupiter’s orbit. given our calculation of the position of the barycen- tre, we can thus calculate the speed of the sun in its orbit about the barycentre. the circumference of the sun’s orbit about the barycentre is: 2 ! π ! 7.77 ! 105 km " 4.9 !