the sun causes a tidal force as well, but its effects are less (at about 46%) than that of the moon. at new and full moon, the tidal forces reinforce to give 100 introduction to astronomy and cosmology what are called spring tides whilst at ﬁ rst and third quarter they partially cancel giving neap tides which have a reduced tidal range. as both the moon and earth are in elliptical orbits the height of the spring tides can vary signiﬁ cantly. when the moon is at perigee (nearest the earth) the tides will be higher whilst, if this is the case when the earth is at perihelion (nearest the sun) in winter, the tidal forces are greatest and we get the highest tides. the gravitational coupling between the moon and the oceans affects the orbit of the moon. due to the earth’s rotation, the tidal bulges do not point directly towards (and away from) the moon. gravitationally, the mass of the earth could be regarded as made up of three parts: (1) a mass at the centre of the earth representing that part (the vast majority) which is spherically symmetric.
(2) one representing the tidal bulge on the near side of the earth to the moon which is ahead of the earth–moon line. (3) one on the far side of the earth which is behind the earth–moon. the gravitational pull on the moon of the nearer water mass is greater. as this is leading the earth–moon line its effect is to try to advance the moon in its orbit. the overall effect is to transfer angular momentum from the earth’s rotation to the moon. as a result, the moon is moving to a higher orbit with a longer period and, each year, the separation of the two bodies is increasing by about 3.8 cm. lunar eclipses if the plane of the moon’s orbit was the same as that of the earth’s orbit around the sun, we would get eclipses of the sun at new moon and eclipses of the moon at full moon. due to the fact that the moon’s orbit is inclined by about 5°, the moon often passes above or below the sun–earth line, and eclipses happen less often.
it might be thought that the moon would totally disappear during a lunar eclipse, but light that is scattered through the earth’s atmosphere falls on the moon so it can still be seen – though far less bright. if we observed the earth from the moon during a lunar eclipse we would see that it would have a red limb as the molecules in the earth’s atmosphere scatters blue light more than red (which also explains why the sun appears red at sunset). the moon thus takes on a reddish hue at totality with the brightness and colour very dependant on the amount of dust in the earth’s atmosphere. following a major volcanic eruption, so little light reaches the moon it can appear a very dull dark grey but conversely, when the atmosphere is relatively free of dust, it can appear a beautiful orange red (figure 3.9). our solar system 2 – the planets 101 lunar exploration the moon has been studied more than any other body in the solar system: it has been imaged from above by lunar orbiters, and its surface studied by a number of landers – the ﬁ rst being lunar 9 in 1965, followed by the russian lunar rovers and the nasa surveyor craft.
lunar exploration culminated in the nasa apollo programme when six spacecraft landed men on the moon. samples of moon rocks have been brought back to earth by three russian missions (luna 16, 20, and 24) and the apollo missions 11, 12, 14, 15, 16 and 17. as shown in figure 3.12, the apollo missions left science packages to measure heat ﬂ ow, magnetic ﬁ elds and seismic oscillations along with corner-cube light reﬂ ectors. each reﬂ ector assembly contained one hundred reﬂ ecting elements sim- ilar to ‘cat’s eyes’. the light from laser equipped telescopes on earth is reﬂ ected to enable the distance from the telescope to the moon to be measured to an accuracy of less than a centimetre. these have enabled the moon’s orbit to be measured with very high precision and, one might point out, provides irrefutable evidence that the apollo missions did go to the moon! there is an interesting aspect of diffrac- tion theory related to these reﬂ ectors which will be analysed in chapter 5.