due to the sun’s radiation, the inner solar system was too warm for volatile molecules like water and methane to condense, so the planetesimals which formed there were relatively small and composed largely of compounds with high melting points, such as silicates and metals. these rocky bodies eventually became the terrestrial planets: mercury, venus, earth and mars. as a result of the gravi- tational effects of jupiter, the formation of a planet between mars and jupiter was disrupted leaving rocky objects that are known as minor planets or asteroids in what is called the asteroid belt. the largest of these, ceres, has recently been given the status of a ‘dwarf planet’. as the temperature fell further away from the sun, volatile icy compounds could remain solid – beyond what is called the frost line. jupiter and saturn were able to gather far more material than the terrestrial planets and overlaying their icy/rocky cores were layers of metallic and molecular hydrogen. they became the gas giants and contain the largest percentages of hydrogen and helium. uranus and neptune captured much less material and are known as ice giants because their cores are believed to be mostly made of ice which is overlain by molecular hydrogen and gases such as ammonia, methane, and carbon monoxide.
as our young sun settled down as a stable hydrogen burning star it went through a phase – called the t-tauri phase – when there was a major outﬂ ow of material ‘boiling off’ from its surface. this outﬂ ow still continues, but at a far slower rate, and is called the solar wind. as a result the protostar lost much of figure 2.2 artist’s impression of the solar nebula. image: ames research centre, nasa. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page63_img1.jpeg] our solar system 1 – the sun 43 its original mass. this strong solar wind cleared away all the remaining gas and dust in the protoplanetary disc into interstellar space, thus ending the growth of the planets. the majority of the moons probably formed at the same time as their parent planets. however, it seems that our own moon probably formed later when a body several times as massive as mars collided with our planet. the giant impact blasted molten rock into orbit around earth which then cooled to form the moon. from radiometric dating, we believe that the oldest rocks on earth are approxi- mately 3.9 billion years old.
we expect that the solar system is older than this as the earth’s surface is constantly evolving as the result of erosion, volcanism and plate tectonics. it is believed that meteorites were formed early on within the solar nebula so estimates of their age should give us an age of the solar system. the oldest meteorites are found to have an age of ∼4.6 billion years, giving us a minimum age of the solar system. 2.2 the sun our sun is certainly a typical star; its structure and the nuclear fusion process by which it generates its energy are applicable to the vast majority of stars. however, it is not, as is often stated, an average star. as we will see in chapter 6, there are seven stellar types: ranging from the hottest to the coolest these are types o, b, a, f, g, k, and m. our sun is a type g star and thus appears, if anything, to be below average. this ignores the fact that there are far more cool stars than hot ones. our sun is of type g2 (at the hotter end of the g type stars), and ∼95% of all stars are smaller and cooler than the sun.
our sun is well above average! 2.2.1 overall properties of the sun observations from earth, coupled with the basic laws of physics, enable us to measure the main properties of the sun. diameter the sun subtends an angle of ~30 arcmin in the sky. given its distance from us of ∼150 000 000 km one can directly estimate the sun’s diameter: d ! rθ (with θ in radians and r is the earth-sun distance.) 44 introduction to astronomy and cosmology θ ! 30/(60 " 57.3) rad ! 8.7 " 10#3 rad so d ! 1.5 " 108 " 8.7 " 10#3 km ! 1 308 900 km this is reasonably close to the accurate value of 1 391 978 km. the sun’s radius is thus ∼700 000 km. (the distance of the earth from the sun varies from a minimum of 147 085 800 km when closest to the sun on january 3 to 152 104 980 km when furthest from the sun on july 4.