there is also the long term prospect of building and operating an optical telescope on the moon – where there is no atmosphere to degrade image quality and no light pollution! 5.12 radio telescopes these are used for the wavelength range that typically ranges from 0.75 m (408 mhz) down to 1 cm (22 ghz). this is the range of wavelengths that reach the ground through the ‘radio window’ limited at the bottom end by the ionosphere and at the upper end by absorption by water vapour in the atmosphere. a great advantage of the fact that radio waves are far longer than optical wavelengths is that they are not absorbed by dust. optical astronomers can only see ∼10% of the way towards the centre of our milky way galaxy due the thick dust lanes that lie along its plane. radio astronomers really can observe parts of the universe inaccessible to optical astronomers! the majority of modern telescopes are either prime focus paraboloids, where the receiver is located at the prime focus above the surface, or of a cassegrain design, which uses a secondary mirror to reﬂ ect the radio waves to a point below figure 5.19 artist’s impression of the 100-m optical telescope concept.
image: european southern observatory. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page202_img1.jpeg] 182 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the centre of the primary reﬂ ecting surface to a point where the radio receivers are located. they tend to have very short focal ratios as in figure 5.1. 5.12.1 the feed and low noise ampliﬁ er system at the focus, a feed collects the radio waves that have been focused by the primary reﬂ ector (and possibly a secondary reﬂ ector) and passes the signal to a low noise ampliﬁ er made using transistors with inherently low noise levels. however, at room temperature, the electrons within the ampliﬁ er produce a signiﬁ cant amount of thermal noise which can be reduced by cooling the ampliﬁ ers to tem- peratures near to absolute zero. the ampliﬁ ers are mounted within a cryostat that is cooled by a gaseous helium refrigeration system.
to minimize the heat reaching the ampliﬁ er from its surroundings, the interior of the cryostat is evacuated to eliminate heat transfer by convection, a radiation shield of highly polished metal reduces transfer of heat by radiation and the wires to supply current to the ampli- ﬁ ers are carried by ﬁ ne wires wrapped around the coldest part of the refrigeration system to extract heat within them. the receivers then reach temperatures of ∼12 k and the thermal noise is reduced to minimal levels. however, the noise produced within the low noise ampliﬁ er is only part of the total noise that the radio telescope will receive even when not directly pointing at a radio source. the total noise is determined by the ‘system noise temperature’, which is the temperature of a cavity in which a noiseless receiver is placed which would give the same signal strength as the real system whose noise contributions come from a number of causes (figure 5.20). in summary, these are: (1) the noise produced by the cooled ampliﬁ er; this might be of order 8 k. (2) noise left over from the big bang.
this is called the cosmic microwave background, and has an equivalent temperature of ∼3 k; it will be discussed in detail in chapter 9. (3) noise from our own milky way galaxy, caused by electrons travelling close to the speed of light (called relativistic electrons) spiralling around the magnetic ﬁ eld of the galaxy. it is called synchrotron radiation as it was ﬁ rst observed being emitted from particle accelerators called synchrotrons. (4) radiation from molecules in the atmosphere, water vapour being a particular problem. the contribution will be less when the humidity is low, and high dry locations will always give a lower contribution. higher frequencies are particularly affected, which is why jodrell bank’s radio telescopes observing the cosmic microwave background at 30 ghz (∼0.7 cm wavelength) are located on the ﬂ anks of mount teide on tenerife observing the universe 183 in the canary islands. antarctica is a superb location from which to observe at very short wavelengths as the water vapour is frozen out of the atmosphere! (5) the ground is at ∼290 k and so radiates as a black body at this temperature.