106 km " 4.9 ! 109 m. so, as 11.86 years is 3.74 ! 108 s, the orbital speed is: 4.9 ! 109/3.74 ! 108 " 13 m s#1. this would mean that the difference between the maximum and minimum veloci- ties would be ∼26 m s#1. the current precision in doppler measurements is of order 2–3 m s#1, but the hope is that, in time, this might improve to ∼0.5 m s#1. very high resolution spec- trometers are used to observe the light from the star whose light is ﬁ rst passed through a cell of gas to provide reference spectral lines to allow the doppler shift to be measured. the measurement accuracy of this method would thus be sufﬁ cient to detect the presence of jupiter in orbit around the sun. however, in order to be reason- ably sure about any periodicity in the sun’s motion one would need to observe for at least half a period and preferably one full period. so observations have to be made on a time scale of many years in order to detect planets far from their sun.
this is the major reason why few planets in large orbits have yet been detected – the observations have simply not been in progress for a sufﬁ ciently long time. 138 introduction to astronomy and cosmology there is one other limitation that you might have realised: should we observe a distant solar system from directly above or directly below, then we would see no doppler wobble and hence could not detect any of its planets. unless we have additional information that can tell us the orientation of the orbital plane of a distant solar system, we can only measure the minimum mass of a planet, not its actual mass. if, for example, we later observed such a planet transit across the face of its sun then we would know that the plane of its solar system included the earth so that the derived mass is the actual mass of the planet, rather than a lower limit. a single planet in a circular orbit will give rise to a doppler curve which is a simple sine wave. if the orbit of the planet is elliptical, a more complex, but regularly repeating doppler curve results. in the case of a family of planets, the doppler curve is complex and will not repeat except on very long timescales.
it can, however, still be analysed to identify the individual planets in the system. in a manner similar to the way in which we calculated the orbital motion of the sun due to jupiter, one could calculate the sun’s orbital velocity due to the earth. this is 0.1 m s!1, well below the current and predicted future sensitivity of the radial velocity method so other methods are required for the detection of earth-like planets. as other techniques (discussed below) come to fruition and longer periods of observation are analysed by the radial velocity method, solar systems like our own are beginning to be found but, as yet, we cannot say how common they are. 4.1.1 pulsar planets there is one case where doppler measurements can be made to extreme accuracy. this is when the central object is the remnant of a giant star called a neutron star. these will be discussed in detail in chapter 7, but all we need to know at this time is that some of these stars (called pulsars) emit regular, very precisely timed pulses and so doppler shifts can be measured to exceedingly high preci- sion. this, in principle, would easily allow earth-mass planets to be discovered.
however, it is thought that planets would not often survive the massive nuclear explosion – called a supernova – when the pulsar is formed, so such planets are likely to be very rare. however, in 2006 observations made using the spitzer space telescope showed that the pulsar 4u 0142"61 had a circumstellar disc. the disc is thought to have formed from metal-rich debris left over from the supernova explosion that had given rise to the pulsar and is similar to those seen around sun-like stars, suggesting that planets might be able to form within it. pulsars emit vast amounts of electromagnetic radiation so such planets would be totally incapable of supporting any form of life! extra-solar planets 139 this is perhaps how the planets were formed in orbit around the pulsar b1257!12. two planets were initially discovered in 1992 by aleksander wolszczan and dale frail. their orbits would both ﬁ t within the orbit of mercury and they had masses of 4.3 and 3.9 earth masses (figure 4.2).