from these data we can compute the mass of the central region using exactly the same calculation as was used to compute the mass of m33: m " r v2/g where m is the mass of the central region of the galaxy, r is the distance of the gas from the centre of the galaxy and v is the velocity of the gas around the centre. 26 ly " 26 # 9.46 # 1015 m " 2.4 # 1017 m, v " 4.0 # 105 m s!1 this gives: m " 2.4 # 1017 # (4 # 105)2/6.67 # 10!11 kg " 5.9 # 1038 kg " 5.9 # 1038/2 # 1030 msun " 2.93 # 108 msun " ∼300 million msun 292 introduction to astronomy and cosmology it is expected that most of this mass will be in a black hole near the centre of the galaxy.
the same calculation as was used to ﬁ nd the schwarzschild radius (rs) for a stellar mass black hole in chapter 7 can be used to ﬁ nd the approximate size of this super-massive black hole: rs ! 3.0 " m/msun km !3.0 " 5.9 " 1038/2 " 1030 km ! 8.8 " 108 km this is somewhat less than the size of the orbit of the planet venus. let us consider what happens as a star begins to fall in towards the black hole. as one side will be closer to the black hole than the other, the gravitational pull on that side will be greater than on the further side. this exerts a differential gravita- tional force on the star, called a tidal force, which increases as the star gets closer to the black hole. the ﬁ nal effect of this tidal force will be to break the star up into its constituent gas and dust. it is unlikely that a star would be falling in directly towards the black hole and would thus have some rotational motion – that is, it would be circling around the black hole as well as gradually falling in towards it.
as the material gets closer it has to conserve angular momentum and so speeds up – just like ice skaters bringing their arms in towards themselves. the result of the material rotating round in close proximity at differing speeds is to produce friction so generating heat that causes the gas and dust to reach very high tem- peratures. the black hole region is surrounded by a torus (or doughnut) of mate- rial called an accretion disc that contains so much dust that it is opaque. however, if, by chance, this torus lies roughly at right angles to our line of sight then we can see in towards the black hole region and will observe the emissions coming from the material. nuclear fusion of hydrogen can convert just under 1% of its rest mass into energy. what is less obvious is that the act of falling into a gravitational potential well can also convert mass into energy. in the case of a super-massive black hole energy equivalent to at least 10% of the mass can be released before it falls within the event horizon – giving the most efﬁ cient source of energy that we know of! if the black hole is rotating, the energy release can be even higher.
this often results in the formation of two opposing jets of particles moving away from the black hole along its rotation axis. moving at speeds close to that of light, these ‘bore’ a hole through the gas surrounding the galaxy and in doing so the particles will be slowed down or decelerated. they then produce radiation across the whole electromagnetic spectrum and thus allow the jets to be observed. if one of the jets happens to be pointing towards us, the observed emission can be very great and so these objects can be seen right across the universe. galaxies and the large scale structure of the universe 293 these highly luminous objects were ﬁ rst discovered by radio astronomers in a series of experiments designed to measure the angular sizes of radio sources. in the early 1960s, the signals received with the 75-m mark i radio telescope at jodrell bank were combined with those from smaller telescopes located at increas- ingly greater distances across the north of england. the observations showed that a number of the most powerful radio sources had angular sizes of less than 1 arc- sec and would appear as ‘stars’ on a photographic plate.