[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page33_img1.jpeg] astronomy, an observational science 13 the earth’s rotation rate is gradually slowing and, as a consequence, the length of time deﬁ ned by the second was increasing. hence, in 1967, a new deﬁ nition of the second was made: the second is the duration of 9 192 631 770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between the two hyperﬁ ne levels of the ground state of the caesium 133 atom. thus our clocks are now related to an atomic time standard which uses caesium beam frequency standards to determine the length of the second. this has not stopped the earth’s rotation from slowing down, and so very grad- ually the synchronization between the sun’s position in the sky and our clocks will be lost. to overcome this, when the difference between the time measured by the atomic clocks and the sun (as determined by the earth’s rotation rate) differs by around a second, a leap second is inserted to bring solar and atomic time back in step. this is usually done at midnight on new year’s eve or june 30.
since the time deﬁ nition was changed, 22 leap seconds have had to be added, about one every 18 months, but there were none between 1998 and 2005 showing the slowdown is not particularly regular. leap seconds are somewhat of a nuisance for systems such as the global positioning system (gps) network and there is pressure to do away with them which is, not surprisingly, opposed by astronomers! if no cor- rection was made and the average slow down over the last 39 years of 0.56 of a second per year continues, then in 1000 years ut and solar time would have drifted apart by ∼9 min. 1.6.5 sidereal time if one started an electronic stop watch running on ut as the star rigel, in orion, was seen to cross the meridian and stopped it the following night when it again crossed the meridian, it would be found to read 23 h, 56 min and 4.09 s, not 24 h. this period is called the sidereal day and is the length of the day as measured with respect to the apparent rotation of the stars. why does the sidereal day have this value?
imagine that the earth was not rotating around its axis and we could observe from the dark side of the earth fac- ing away from the sun. at some point in time we would see rigel due south. as the earth moves around the sun, rigel would be seen to move towards the west and, 3 months later, would set from view. six months later after setting in the west, it would be seen to rise in the east and precisely 1 year later we would see it due south again. so, in the absence of the earth’s rotation, rigel would appear to make one rotation of the earth in 1 year and so the sidereal day would be 1 earth 14 introduction to astronomy and cosmology year. in reality, during this time, the earth has made ∼365 rotations so, in relation to the star rigel (or any other star), the earth has made a total of ∼365 ! 1 rota- tions in 1 year and hence there are ∼366 sidereal days in 1 year. the sidereal day is thus a little shorter and is approximately 365/366 of an earth day.
the difference would be ∼1/366 of a day or 1440/366 min giving 3.93 min or 3 min 55.8 s. the length of the sidereal day on this simpliﬁ ed calculation is thus approximately 23 h 56 min 4.2 s, very close to the actual value. 1.6.6 an absolute time standard – cosmic time this section is not really necessary for the development of this chapter, but the ideas described here are very interesting and allow some discussion of einstein’s theories of relativity and the fact that, only recently, we have been able to consider how time measured by us on earth relates to the timescale of the universe. in 1905, albert einstein, then working in the berne patent ofﬁ ce, published his paper on the special theory of relativity. perhaps one of the most well known aspects of this theory is that moving clocks appear to run slow when compared with a clock at rest with an observer – a phenomenon called time dilation. this prediction has been proven by ﬂ ying highly accurate atomic clocks around the world and has to be taken into account in the gps system used for navigation.