7.11.1 what can pulsars tell us about the universe? pulsars give us a way of investigating matter in a super-dense form that we have no possibility of making here on earth. for example, observations of the crab pulsar have enabled veriﬁ cation of aspects of the theoretical makeup of neutron stars described above. a small radio telescope at the jodrell bank observatory observes the pulses from the crab pulsar all the time that it lies above the horizon. it has been discovered that, about every 3–6 years, its spin rate suddenly increases – an event known as a glitch. this seems odd as generally pulsars slow down with time. the likely explanation is this: as the outer parts of the neutron star slow, an inner part, thought to be in the form of a sea of superﬂ uid neutrons (and thus hav- ing no viscosity) would not be slowed as it is effectively decoupled from the outer 256 introduction to astronomy and cosmology parts of the neutron star. the situation will then arise that the superﬂ uid region towards the centre of the neutron star will be rotating more rapidly than the outer parts.
it is thought this region can contain vortices and eventually, when these interact with the outer parts of the star, angular momentum can be transferred which rapidly increases the pulsar’s rotation rate! the pulsar then continues to slow with the centre remaining at a constant (but now slower) rotation rate until the process repeats. as the pulse travels through the interstellar medium, the radio waves cause electrons to vibrate in sympathy. this process, called dispersion, slows the radio waves and has a greater effect at lower frequencies. a sharp pulse emitted by the pulsar will thus be gradually broadened as it travels through space and, if observed over a range of frequencies, the pulse is seen to arrive earlier at higher frequencies as shown in figure 7. 14. the amount of dispersion depends on the total electron content along the route the pulse has taken to the earth and so more distant pulsars will show more dispersion. if one assumes the electron density in the interstellar medium is roughly constant, one can use the measured dispersion to estimate the distances to the pulsars.
most pulsars are seen along the plane of the galaxy, just as one would suspect as they are the remnants of stars but, perhaps surprisingly, a signiﬁ cant number are observed away from the plane. the 217-km merlin array at jodrell bank observatory is capable of making very precise measurements of the position of pulsars and has observed, from positional measurements made over a number of years, that many are moving at speed comparable with, and even exceeding, the figure 7.14 diagram showing the dispersion of a radio pulse. image: university of manchester. –150 1250 1300 1350 1400 frequency (mhz) 1450 1500 1550 –100 –50 0 time (ms) 50 100 150 [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page277_img1.jpeg] stellar evolution – the life and death of stars 257 escape velocity of the galaxy (∼500 km s!1). the highest pulsar speed so far mea- sured (in this case by the usa’s 5000-km vlba array) is 1100 km s!1 – london to new york in 5 s!
these pulsars have obviously been ejected from the supernova explosion that gave rise to them with very great energies, enabling them to travel around the galaxy and, in some cases, to leave the galaxy into the depths of intergalactic space. it appears that, usually, the supernova explosion will be more intense on one side or the other of the central neutron star which is then ejected at high speeds rather like a bullet from a gun. in some cases it is even possible to track the course of a pulsar back to the gaseous remnant of the supernova. the situation where the resulting pulsar remains within the supernova gas shell, such as in the crab nebula, appears to be very rare. 7.12 pulsars as tests for general relativity pulsar systems have played a very signiﬁ cant role in testing einstein’s general theory of relativity – his theory of gravity. it is the fact that pulsars are such superbly accurate clocks that have made them such valuable tools with which to test einstein’s theory. the ﬁ rst such test came with the discovery, by russell taylor and joseph hulse in 1974, of the ﬁ rst ‘binary pulsar’.