this is at right angles to the direction of the incoming photon and the result is to give the photon some uncertainty in its future direction. a beam of individual photons passing through the aperture thus ‘spreads out’ giving rise to the airy disc. you can immediately see that the smaller the aperture through which the photons pass, the greater the knowledge about their position and hence the less well determined is their momentum and the airy disc gets larger – agreeing with the formula given above. consider a photon passing through a slot aperture along the x axis which has a width d in the y axis as shown in figure 5.9. it has come from inﬁ nity along the x axis and has a momentum p. quantum mechanics states that the momentum, px, of the photon is given by: px ! h/λ where h is planck’s constant and λ is the wavelength. figure 5.9 diﬀ raction of a photon passing through an aperture. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page186_img1.jpeg] 166 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the fact that it has passed through the slit will give the photon an uncertainty in its momentum in the y direction of ∆py, where as ∆x !
d: ∆pyd ! h from the momentum equation, h ! px λ, so, ∆py d ! pxλ, giving ∆py/px ! λ/d. the uncertainty in ∆py gives an uncertainty in the direction in which the photon continues of ∆θ ! ∆py/px so, substituting from above gives: ∆θ ! λ/d. this is the angular uncertainty when the photon’s position has only been constrained along one axis. a lens of aperture d will constrain the photons along two axes, and one would expect the uncertainty to become greater. hence the factor 1.22 derived by the formal calculation. 5.4.1 an interesting worked example of the eﬀ ects of diﬀ raction in section 3.5.4 it was pointed out that the lunar laser reﬂ ectors were made up of 100 small reﬂ ectors rather than one large one. let us see why. the laser pulse sent from a telescope on earth is reﬂ ected by 100, 3.8 cm square, corner-cube reﬂ ectors forming a square array whose sides are 46 cm in length.
consider ﬁ rst a single 46 cm square reﬂ ector. the light pulse reﬂ ected by the reﬂ ec- tor could be thought of as a beam of light coming from beyond the moon’s surface that has passed through a square aperture of this size on its way to earth. assuming that a green laser is used, the beam will thus be spread over an angle given by: ∆θ ! ∼1.22 λ/d ! ∼1.22 " 5.5 " 10#7/0.46 ! ∼1.5 " 10#6 rad the beam will thus be spread over this angle and could thus be seen over an area of the earth whose diameter, d, is given by r " ∆θ, where r is the distance of the moon’s surface from a typical point on the surface of the earth. observing the universe 167 d ! ∼1.5 " 10#6 " 378 000 ! ∼0.57 km the radius of this area will thus be ∼0.28 km.
however during the 2.5 s the pulse takes to reach and return from the moon, the telescope will have moved as the earth rotates around its axis. if the telescope that sent the pulse was located at a latitude of 40° then the distance moved, dt, would be given by the circumference of the earth at latitude 40 times the ratio of 2.5 s to 1 day: dt ! 2 " π " [6780 " cos (40)] " 2.5/24 " 3600 dt ! 0.94 km so the laser ranging telescope will have moved out of the region where it could receive the returned echo! by using smaller individual reﬂ ectors, in this case 3.8 cm, the reﬂ ected beam will have an angular size 46/3.8 times larger and, on the earth, will cover an area of radius 3.4 km which is comfortably greater than the telescope’s change of position.