he was led to believe that the universe was ‘static’, or unchanging with time, and this caused him a real problem as gravity, being an attractive force, would naturally cause stationary objects in space to collapse down to one point. to overcome this he had to introduce a term into his equations that he called the cosmological constant, lambda or λ. this represents a form of antigravity that has the interesting property that its effects become greater with distance. so, with one force decreasing and the second increasing with distance it was possible to produce a static solution. he later realised that this was an unstable situation, and that a static universe was not possible, calling this ‘the greatest blunder’ of his life. he could have predicted that the universe must be either expanding or contracting. however, as we shall see, perhaps he was not as wrong as he thought. 9.2 big bang models of the universe a russian meteorologist, a.a. friedmann, solved einstein’s equations to produce a set of models in which the universe expanded from a point, or singularity.
these were given the name big bang models by fred hoyle – this was meant to be a disparaging term as hoyle was an advocate of another theory, the steady state theory, to be discussed below, and did not like them! in all of these models, the ini- tially fast rate of expansion is slowed by the attractive gravitational force between the matter of the universe. if the density of matter within the universe exceeded a critical amount, it would be sufﬁ cient to cause the expansion to cease and then chapter 9 introduction to astronomy and cosmology ian morison © 2008 john wiley & sons, ltd 302 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the universe would collapse down to a ‘big crunch’ (these are called ‘closed’ universes). if the actual density was less than the critical density, the universe would expand for ever (called ‘open’ universes). in the critical case that is the boundary between the open and closed universes, the rate of expansion would fall to zero after inﬁ nite time (called the ‘ﬂ at’ or ‘critical’ universe) (figure 9.2).
a useful analogy is that of ﬁ ring a rocket from the earth; if the speed of the rocket is less than 11.186 km s!1, the earth’s escape velocity, the rocket will eventually come to a halt and fall back to earth (equivalent to closed universes), if it equals 11.186 km s!1 it will escape the earth with its speed reducing with time figure 9.1 albert einstein in 1947. image: wikipedia commons. figure 9.2 the friedmann models of an expanding universe. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page323_img1.jpeg] [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page323_img2.jpeg] cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 303 (equivalent to the critical universe), whilst if it exceeds 11.186 km s!1 it will leave the earth more quickly (equivalent to open universes). the models are distinguished by a constant, ω (omega) that is deﬁ ned as the ratio of the actual density to the critical density.
in closed universes, ω is greater than 1, space has positive curvature, the angles within a triangle add up to more than 180° and two initially parallel light rays would converge. in open universes, ω is less than 1, space has negative curvature, the angles within a triangle add up to less than 180° and two initially parallel light rays would diverge. in the critical case, ω is equal to 1, space is said to be ‘ﬂ at’, the angles within a triangle add up to 180° and two initially parallel light rays will remain parallel. it should be pointed out that this refers to a universe on the very large scale and, as we have seen, in the region of a massive object, such as a star or galaxy, the space becomes positively curved. 9.3 the blueshifts and redshifts observed in the spectra of galaxies when the spectra of galaxies were ﬁ rst observed in the early 1900s it was found that their observed spectral lines, such as those of hydrogen and calcium, were shifted from the positions of the lines when observed in the laboratory.