assuming that our eyes alone could see a star of 6.5 magnitude, then with the 150 mm telescope we might expect to see a star of 6.5 # 6.6 ! 13.1 magnitudes. this is called the limit- ing magnitude for that telescope. this calculation relates to telescopes which are 100% efﬁ cient, that is, all the light that enters the telescope reaches the eye. this is effectively true for refracting telescopes which may have an efﬁ ciency of 98%, but reﬂ ecting telescopes will not perform quite as well. the mirrors of a reﬂ ecting telescope may only reﬂ ect 86% of the incident light so, as two mirrors are required, the efﬁ ciency drops to 74%. modern multi-layer coatings have brought up the reﬂ ectivity to 97%, so giving an overall efﬁ ciency of nearly 94% – a major improvement.
one needs to increase the diameter of the objective by 1.58 to gain an extra magnitude (as from 10 to 16 in.), but the number of visible stars goes up very rapidly with increasing mag- nitude so even half a magnitude difference will show a lot more stars. it is not widely known that increasing the magniﬁ cation of a telescope, discussed later, will enable fainter stars to be seen if there is light in the sky from the moon or light pollution. increased magniﬁ cation reduces the apparent bright- ness of the overall sky light, but does not reduce the brightness of the stars, so enabling them to stand out more easily. very good seeing (less turbulence in the atmosphere) and the use of excellent optics will produce smaller stellar images. as their image is spread over a smaller region of the retina the photons are more likely to trigger a response and a star will be seen where under less good seeing it would not. observing from higher altitudes, there is obviously less atmosphere above and fainter stars will be seen.
however, if you go too high, less oxygen reaches the brain and the eyes become less efﬁ cient (around 6000–8000 ft is probably 164 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the optimum unless you have access to an oxygen bottle). at these heights the unaided eye can perceive stars of 8th magnitude! 5.4 using a telescope to see more detail in an image there is a fundamental limit to the detail in the image produced by a telescope which is caused by the effects of diffraction. assuming that the telescope has a circular aperture, and in the absence of an atmosphere, then the image formed by a point source is a central disc surrounded by a number of concentric rings rapidly decreasing in brightness. in a perfect telescope the central disc contains 84% of the light with the remainder in the surrounding rings – most in the ﬁ rst ring which has about twice the diameter of the disc. this pattern, called the airy disc, shown in figure 5.8, is named after the astronomer royal, george airy, who gained some notoriety for not pursuing the discovery of the planet neptune.
the angular size of this pattern, ∆θ, is a function of both the wavelength of light, λ, and the diameter of the telescope objective, d: ∆θ ! 1.22 λ/d the angular size of the airy disc is related to what is termed the resolution of a telescope. for a given wavelength the resolution increases with telescope aperture and is inversely proportional to d. figure 5.8 the airy disc. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page185_img1.jpeg] observing the universe 165 the calculation of this formula requires calculus but an approximate derivation can be gained by using a little quantum mechanics. it is based on the heisenberg uncertainty principle which states, in one of its forms, that the more accurately we know the position of an object, the less accurately we can know its momentum. the principle states that the product of the uncertainty in x, ∆x, times the uncertainty in p, ∆p, must be less that planck’s constant, h. when a photon passes through an aperture (like a lens) its position is determined to a certain extent so we cannot be so sure about its momentum along the axis or axes in which it is constrained.