astronomers measure the colour index of a star by subtracting the magnitude in one spectral range from that in another. a standard set of ﬁ lters has been deﬁ ned for use at observatories all over the world: the ultraviolet band is called u magnitude, the blue band the b magnitude, the yellow band (which roughly matches the spec- tral sensitivity of the eye) the v magnitude, and the red band the r magnitude. thousands of stars have had their magnitudes measured in the u, b and v ﬁ lters – in so-called ubv photometry. the difference between the magnitudes in the b and v bands is called the colour index. a very hot star is brighter in the blue than in the yellow part of the spectrum, so the v magnitude will be higher and thus the colour index will be negative. the colour index is zero for a star whose temperature is ∼10 000 k; !0.3 for the very hottest stars and ∼"2 for the coolest. 6.7 stellar spectra when discussing the sun, the formation of the fraunhofer absorption lines observed in its spectrum was described.
it turns out that the absorption lines that are seen in the spectra of stars are very closely related to the temperature of the gas through which the light passes on its way from their visible surfaces. if the temperature of a gas was at absolute zero, all the electrons would be in the low- est possible energy levels – the ground states of the atoms. as the temperature rises, ﬁ rst some electrons will rise into their ﬁ rst excited state and then to higher excited states until, at sufﬁ ciently high temperatures, electrons may escape from their atoms which are then said to be ionized. the remnant of an atom will then have less than its full quota (one for each proton) of electrons and is called an ion (often called a positive ion as, having lost electrons having negative charge, it will have a net positive charge). roman numerals are used to deﬁ ne the state of ionization of atoms. for example, h i represents a neutral hydrogen atom and h ii an ionized hydrogen atom that has lost its one electron. in the same way he i is neutral helium, he ii singly ionized helium and he iii doubly ionized helium. the roman numeral is simply the number of lost electrons "1.
the properties of stars 215 6.7.1 the hydrogen spectrum neutral hydrogen produces a distinctive set of spectral lines, called the balmer series that range in wavelength from 363.46 nm in the ultraviolet to 656.3 nm in the red. the most prominent is the 635.3 nm red line which is called the hα line and is seen in clouds of gas where the electrons have been lifted into excited states by incident ultraviolet radiation and then drop back down into lower energy states. to form the balmer series of visible lines the electrons drop down to the ﬁ rst excited state called level 2. the hα line is caused by a transition from the sec- ond to the ﬁ rst excited state and thus from level 3 down to level 2. the green line, produced by the transition from level 4 down to level 2, is called the hβ line whilst the hγ line, in the mid blue, is produced by the transition from level 5 down to level 2 (figure 6.4).
our eyes are not sensitive to the red light of the hα line and, sadly, we see very little colour in the universe with our eyes, but our eyes are far more sensitive in the green, and using a telescope of ∼16 in. or more aperture some objects, such as the dumbell planetary nebula, appear a vivid green – the light from the hβ line. other atoms will produce similar series of lines either in neutral or ionized form dependant on the temperature of the stellar atmosphere. the absorption spectra that we observe are thus a mix of all these lines and depend strongly on tem- perature. the hydrogen balmer series, for example, appears strongest when the star’s atmosphere is ∼9000 k. at very high stellar temperatures, virtually all the hydrogen atoms are ionized so the balmer lines are very weak. however, it takes far more energy to fully ionize helium so lines of both neutral (he i) and singly ionized (he ii) helium are seen. figure 6.4 the transitions that give rise to the balmer series of spectral lines.