in this ﬁ rst chapter, we will see how two precise sets of obser- vations, made with very simple instruments in the sixteenth century, were able to lead to a signiﬁ cant understanding of our solar system. in turn, these helped in the formulation of newton’s theory of gravity and subsequently einstein’s general theory of relativity – a theory of gravity which underpins the whole of modern cosmology. in order that these observations may be understood, some of the basics of observational astronomy are also discussed. 1.2 galileo galilei’s proof of the copernican theory of the solar system one of the ﬁ rst triumphs of observational astronomy was galileo’s series of obser- vations of venus which showed that the sun, not the earth, was at the centre of the solar system so proving that the copernican, rather than the ptolemaic, model was correct (figure 1.1). in the ptolemaic model of the solar system (which is more subtle than is often acknowledged), the planets move around circular ‘epicycles’ whose centres move around the earth in larger circles, called deferents, as shown in figure 1.2.
this enables it to account for the ‘retrograde’ motion of planets like mars and jupiter when they appear to move backwards in the sky. it also models the motion of mercury and venus. in their case, the deferents, and hence the centre of their chapter 1 introduction to astronomy and cosmology ian morison © 2008 john wiley & sons, ltd 2 introduction to astronomy and cosmology figure 1.1 galileo galilei: a portrait by guisto sustermans. image: wikipeda commons. figure 1.2 the centre points of the epicycles for mercury and venus move round the earth with the same angular speed as the sun. epicycles, move around the earth at the same rate as the sun. the two planets thus move around in circular orbits, whose centres lie on the line joining the earth and the sun, being seen either before dawn or after sunset. note that, as mercury stays closer to the sun than venus, its deferent and epicycle are closer than that of venus – in the ptolemaic model, mercury is the closest planet to the earth!
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page23_img1.jpeg] [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page23_img2.jpeg] astronomy, an observational science 3 in the ptolemaic model, venus lies between the earth and the sun and hence it must always be lit from behind, so could only show crescent phases whilst its angular size would not alter greatly. in contrast, in the copernican model venus orbits the sun. when on the nearside of the sun, it would show crescent phases whilst, when on its far side but still visible, it would show almost full phases. as its distance from us would change signiﬁ cantly, its angular size (the angle subtended by the planet as seen from the earth) would likewise show a large change. figure 1.3 shows a set of drawings of venus made by galileo with his simple refracting telescope. they are shown in parallel with a set of modern photographs which illustrate not only that galileo showed the phases, but that he also drew the changing angular size correctly.
these drawings showed precisely what the copernican model predicts: almost full phases when venus is on the far side of the sun and a small angular size coupled with thin crescent phases, having a signiﬁ - cantly larger angular size, when it is closest to the earth. galileo’s observations, made with the simplest possible astronomical instru- ment, were able to show which of the two competing models of the solar system was correct. in just the same way, but using vastly more sophisticated instru- ments, astronomers have been able to choose between competing theories of the universe – a story that will be told in chapter 9. figure 1.3 galileo’s drawings of venus (top) compared with photographs taken from earth (bottom). [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page24_img1.jpeg] 4 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 1.3 the celestial sphere and stellar magnitudes looking up at the heavens on a clear night, we can imagine that the stars are located on the inside of a sphere, called the celestial sphere, whose centre is the centre of the earth.