6.76 " 10#11 n m2 kg#2 due to his lucky estimate of the mean density of the earth, this was a very good result – the now accepted value of g being 6.67 " 10#11 n m2 kg#2. 1.10 experimental measurements of g, the universal constant of gravitation in 1774, nevil maskelyne used the deﬂ ection (about 11 arcsec) of a plumb line, on the slopes of mt schiehallion in scotland, to determine the gravitational attraction between the plum bob and the mountain. he was primarily inter- ested in using this result to measure the mean density of the earth. schiehallion, which rises to 3547 ft (∼1081 m), has a very regular shape, and so maskelyne was able to estimate the mountain’s mass and thus determine the value of g, but his values for g and that of the density of the earth (4400 kg m#3) were not very accurate.
later, in 1798, henry cavendish was the ﬁ rst to measure g in the laboratory using equipment devised by john mitchell, who had died before being able to complete the experiment. mitchell had built a very sensitive torsion balance (figure 1.19) for the measurement: a horizontal beam with small lead balls at each end is suspended from its centre by a thin torsion wire. large lead balls astronomy, an observational science 33 were then placed near each of the small balls in the same horizontal plane such that the gravitational attraction of the large balls on the small balls tended to twist the torsion wire in the same direction. the force due to the gravitational attraction between the ball pairs was balanced by the force produced by the twisting of the torsion wire. in a further experiment, the force required to twist the wire was measured by timing the free oscillations of the beam about the axis of the torsion wire. from his measurements, cavendish derived a value for g of 6.75 ! 10"11 n m2 kg"2.
1.11 gravity today: einstein’s special and general theories of relativity in 1905, as mentioned in section 1.6.6, albert einstein published his paper on the special theory of relativity. one consequence of this theory was that nothing could travel through space faster than the speed of light. this extended beyond material things: information and the effects of force ﬁ elds were included too. einstein realised that this was not compatible with newton’s law of gravitation which implied ‘instantaneous action at a distance’. i have italicized the word ‘through’. it is possible for the expansion of space to carry objects apart faster than the speed of light – indeed we believe that this happened during a period called ‘inﬂ ation’ close to the origin of the universe. imagine making a currant bun: currants are packed tightly into the dough which is then placed into an oven. when cooked, one hopes that the dough will have expanded, increasing the separation of the currants. they have not moved through the dough, but have been carried apart by the expansion of the dough. figure 1.19 the cavendish experiment.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page54_img1.jpeg] 34 introduction to astronomy and cosmology perhaps a thought experiment will help to make the incompatibility of newton’s theory with special relativity clear. suppose that the sun could suddenly cease to exist. under newton’s gravity, where the effect of a change in mass would be instantly felt throughout the universe, the earth would immediately ﬂ y off at a tangent. einstein realised that this could not be the case. not only would we not be aware of the demise of the sun for 8.31 min – the time that light takes to travel from the sun to the earth – but the earth must continue to feel the gravitational effects of the sun for just the same time, and would only ﬂ y off at a tangent at the moment we ceased to see the sun. this assumes, of course, that whatever carries the information about the gravitational ﬁ eld of the sun will also propagate at the speed of light. consequently, something has to propagate through space to carry the information about a change in gravity ﬁ eld. einstein thus postulated the exis- tence of gravitational waves that carry such information.