he lodged with the school’s headmaster who gave isaac private tuition and he was able to enter trinity college, cambridge in 1661 as a somewhat more mature student than most of his contemporaries. he received his bachelor’s degree in april 1665 but then had to return home when the university was closed as a result of the plague. it was there, in a period of 2 years and whilst he was still under 25, that his genius became apparent. figure 1.16 the transit of venus on june 8, 2004 seen through hazy cloud. image: ian morison using a 150 mm refractor. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page46_img1.jpeg] 26 introduction to astronomy and cosmology there is a story (which is probably apocryphal) that newton was sitting under the apple tree in the garden of woolsthorpe manor. he might well have been able to see the ﬁ rst or last quarter moon in the sky. it is said that an apple dropped on his head (or thudded to the ground beside him) and this made him wonder why the moon did not fall towards the earth as well.
newton’s moment of genius was to realise that the moon was falling towards the earth! he was aware of galileo’s work relating to the trajectories of projectiles and, in his great work principia published in 1686, he considered what would happen if one ﬁ red a cannon ball horizontally from the top of a high mountain where air resistance could be ignored. the cannon ball would follow a parabolic path to the ground. as the cannon ball was ﬁ red with greater and greater velocity it would land further and further away from the mountain. as the landing point becomes further away the curvature of the earth must be considered. in a more popular work published in the 1680s called a treatise of the system of the world, he included figure 1.17. the mountain is impossibly high in order for it to reach above the earth’s atmosphere. however, this is a thought experiment, not a real one. one can see from this that, if the velocity is gradually increased there would come a point when the cannon ball would never land – and would be in an orbit around the earth. figure 1.17 newton’s thought experiment using a cannon ball.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page47_img1.jpeg] astronomy, an observational science 27 let us ﬁ rst treat this experiment quantitatively and use modern day values and units to extend newton’s arguments to encompass the moon. you can calculate that the surface of the earth falls below a ﬂ at horizontal line by approximately 5 m over a distance of 8 km. if one drops a mass from rest at the surface of the earth, it will drop a height of ½gt2 in a time t, where g is the acceleration due to gravity at the earth’s surface. the value of g is 9.8 m s!2 so the fall would be 4.9 m. so, if we ﬁ red the cannon ball with a speed of about 8000 m s!1, its fall after 8 km would match the falling away of the earth’s surface and the cannon ball would remain in orbit. newton applied the same logic to the motion of the moon, realising that, if the gravitational attraction between the earth and moon caused it to fall by just the right amount, it too would remain in orbit around the earth.
he knew enough about the moon to be able to calculate the value of the acceleration of gravity at the distance of the moon. for this, he needed to know the radius of the moon’s orbit (assumed to be circular) about the centre of the earth, and also the period of its orbit around the earth. newton used a value of the radius of the moon’s orbit of 384 000 km and a period of 27.32 days or 2.36 " 106 s. referring to figure 1.18 (which is not to scale) one can easily calculate the distance, l (the length ab), and direction (tangential to the radius vector) that the moon would travel in 1 s if sud- denly there were no gravitational attraction between the earth and the moon. figure 1.18 geometry of the earth–moon system. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page48_img1.jpeg] 28 introduction to astronomy and cosmology using the small angle approximation, where sin θ ! θ (in radians), then l ! r " θ, so θ ! (1/2.36 " 106) " 2 " π !