calculations show that if the escape velocity of a planet exceeds the average speed of a given type of molecule by a factor of 6 or more, then these molecules will not have escaped in signiﬁ cant amounts during the lifetime of the solar system. in the earth’s atmosphere, the mean molecular speeds of oxygen and nitrogen are well below one-sixth of the escape speed. now consider the moon: its escape velocity is 2.4 km s#1 and, assuming that any atmosphere it might have had would have been at the same temperature as our own, the mean molecular speeds of 86 introduction to astronomy and cosmology nitrogen and oxygen would be only about ﬁ ve times less than the moon’s escape velocity so it is not surprising that it has no atmosphere! if mercury had an atmo- sphere it would have a temperature of ∼700 k, giving nitrogen or oxygen an aver- age molecular speed of about 0.8 km s!1, signiﬁ cantly more than one-sixth of mercury’s escape velocity of 4.2 km s!1. there has thus been ample time for these molecules to escape. these arguments allow us to see why our own atmosphere contains very little hydrogen.
hydrogen molecules move, on average, at about 2 km s!1, which is just more than one-sixth of the earth’s escape velocity. hydrogen will thus have been able to escape and now makes up only 0.000055% of the atmosphere! in contrast, consider jupiter: its escape velocity is 60 km s!1 and it has a surface temperature of only 100 k. in the jovian atmosphere, the speed of the hydrogen molecules is only about 1 km s!1, 60 times less than the escape velocity, and so jupiter has been able to keep the hydrogen as the largest constituent in its atmosphere. summary • mercury, the moon and all satellites except for titan and triton have effec- tively no atmospheres, though mercury has an extremely thin ‘transient’ atmosphere of hydrogen and helium temporarily captured from the solar wind. • the other terrestrial planets cannot hold on to hydrogen or helium, so will have lost all the initial atmospheres derived from the solar nebula. • the outer planets are both massive and cold and so have been able to keep all of the light gases acquired from the solar nebula.
though similar in mass to the moon, titan and triton are sufﬁ ciently cold to have kept atmospheres, largely made up of nitrogen. • the dwarf planets pluto and eris are so cold that any nitrogen or other gases would be frozen and form part of the surface. 3.4.1 secondary atmospheres later in their lives, the planets venus, earth and mars gained further atmospheres which were the result of out-gassing from volcanoes. it is thought that only 1% of the current earth’s atmosphere remains from its primeval atmosphere. volca- nic eruptions produce varying amounts of gases which arise from the melting of the planet’s crust at great depth. all eruptions differ but, in general, release gases such as water vapour, carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide, hydrogen sulphide, ammonia, nitrogen and nitrous oxide. it is thought that ultraviolet light falling on water vapour in the upper atmospheres of venus and mars would have split it into hydrogen and hydroxyl (oh). the hydrogen molecules would then have escaped so removing water vapour from their atmospheres.
our solar system 2 – the planets 87 3.4.2 the evolution of the earth’s atmosphere we have seen how the primeval atmosphere of the earth, largely made up of hydro- gen and helium would have been lost and replaced by a secondary atmosphere which was the result of volcanic out-gassing. it was primarily made up of carbon dioxide and water vapour, with some nitrogen but virtually no oxygen and con- tained perhaps 100 times as much gas as at present. as the earth cooled, much of the carbon dioxide dissolved into the oceans and precipitated out as carbonates. a major change began some 3.3 billion years ago when the ﬁ rst oxygen pro- ducing bacteria arose on earth and which, in the following billion years, gave us much of the oxygen in our atmosphere. oxygen and bacteria could then react with the ammonia released by out-gassing to form additional nitrogen. more nitrogen was formed by the action of ultraviolet radiation on ammonia in a pro- cess call photolysis. as the vegetation increased, the level of oxygen in the atmosphere increased signiﬁ cantly and an ozone layer appeared.