it comprises three arms of nine 25-m antennas in a ‘y’ formation. the array can be conﬁ gured in a number of ways with a greatest overall separation of 36 km. waveguides are currently used to carry the radio signals to the central ‘ correlator’ where the signals from the individual telescopes are combined in pairs. it can operate at wavelengths of 400 cm down to 0.7 cm. • the merlin array across the uk has an overall size of 217 km and normally incorporates ﬁ ve 25-m antennas and one 32-m antenna. for observations where high sensitivity is required the 76-m lovell telescope can be incorpo- rated into the array. it can operate at wavelengths of 74 cm down to 1.3 cm. • the giant metre radio telescope (gmrt) is located at a site near pune in india. the gmrt consists of thirty 45-m diameter dishes separated by up to 25 km. fourteen of the 30 dishes are located in a compact central array in a region of about 1 km2 with the remaining 16 dishes spread out along the three arms of a ‘y’-shaped conﬁ guration.
it can operate over a wavelength range of 6 m down to 21 cm. observing the universe 189 the resolution of these arrays depends on the overall diameter and operating wavelength. one signiﬁ cant attribute of the merlin array is that its resolution is comparable with that of the hst. at the wavelength of 5 cm the resolution is given by: resolution ! ∆θ ! 1.22 λ/d ! 1.22 " 0.05/217 000 rad ! 2.8 " 10#7 rad ! 2.8 " 10#7 " 57.3 " 3600 arcsec ! 0.06 arcsec this is 1/15th of an arcsecond, comparable with that of the hst resolution at visible wavelengths and so allows images in the optical and radio parts of the electromagnetic spectrum to be directly compared. 5.12.6 very long baseline interferometry (vlbi) the highest resolutions available in any part of the electromagnetic spectrum are provided by arrays of radio telescopes that cross continents in what are called vlbi arrays. the core of the european vlbi network (evn) incorporates antennas figure 5.25 the very large array in new mexico, usa.
image: wikipedia commons. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page210_img1.jpeg] 190 introduction to astronomy and cosmology stretching from the uk across to poland and from finland to sicily. it is also possible to include two antennas in china, one in south africa and the arecibo telescope in the caribbean. as a radio source is observed simultaneously at each observatory, the data is digitized and ‘time stamped’ using the observatory’s atomic clock. the data are then stored on arrays of hard disks. at the end of the observing session the hard disks are shipped to holland where the data are combined in a correlator at jive – the joint institute for vlbi in europe. it is now also possible to transfer data directly to jive using the internet and this allows immediate analysis of the data which is a great asset when planning observations of transient events. due to the great size of the array, resolutions of less than 1 milliarcsec are possible allow- ing, for example, the expanding shell of a supernova in a galaxy 12 million light years to be imaged and its expansion rate measured (as shown in figure 5.26).
the white spots in the radio image, lower right, are supernovae remnants, one of which has been imaged by the evn over a 12-year interval. figure 5.26 the starburst galaxy m82. upper left: hubble space telescope image of m82 in visible light. lower right: vla and merlin radio image of the central part of m82 with, below, evn images of an expanding supernova remnant. image: hubble space telescope institute, nasa and the university of manchester. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page211_img1.jpeg] observing the universe 191 two further vlbi arrays exist; the us very long baseline array (vlba) that stretches from hawaii to st croix in the caribbean, and the asia paciﬁ c telescope (apt) which incorporates antennas in australia, japan, china and south africa to provide high resolution studies of radio sources in the southern hemisphere.