the dust tail is yellowish in colour and tends to lie along the orbit of the comet so often appears curved. the coma may exceed the sun in size, and ion tails have been known to extend over 1 au in length, and so are the largest objects in the solar system. the size of the coma and tail increases as the comet nears the sun and the comet will tend to be most apparent immediately after it has passed the sun. we thus tend to observe them in the period before dawn or after dusk. with each passage around the sun, the comet loses material and will eventually disintegrate into a trail of dust or become an inert, asteroid-like body of fractured rock. the fact that comets may contain signiﬁ cant amounts of organic compounds is indicated by their very low albedo. the giotto space probe showed that comet halley’s nucleus reﬂ ected only ∼4% of the incident sunlight whilst deep space 1 showed that comet borrelly only reﬂ ected ∼2.6%. it is thought that the dark sur- face is made up of complex, tar-like organic compounds and hence that cometary impacts on earth may have brought much organic material to our surface.
it is also thought that such impacts may have brought much of the water found on the planet and they most certainly have had an effect on the direction of evolu- tion here on earth. we have a lot to thank them for – apart from providing us with some of the most beautiful sights in the heavens! 3.7 questions 1. an eclipse of the sun is to occur on the day of the vernal equinox and when the earth is at a distance of 150 million km from the sun. the eclipse track passes over the equator at 12:00 local solar time. show that, if the moon is at its furthest point from the earth (at apogee) that day, the eclipse as observed from the equator will be an annular, not a total, eclipse. show also that if the moon were to be closest to the earth that day (at perigee) there would be a total eclipse. our solar system 2 – the planets 133 (the equatorial radius of the earth is 6378 km. the semi-major axis of the moon’s orbit is 384 401 km and the eccentricity of its orbit is 0.056. its diameter is 3474.8 km.
the diameter of the sun is 1.39 million km.) 2. a rapidly rotating asteroid lies four times further from the sun than the earth. assuming the asteroid acts like a black body and is roughly spherical, estimate its surface temperature. (the solar constant at the earth’s distance is 1370 w m!2 and stefan’s constant is 5.7 " 10!8 w m!2 k!4.) 3. show that the surface temperature, t, of a rotating spherical body at a distance r from the sun falls as the inverse square root of r. knowing that a spacecraft in earth orbit prior to orbital insertion towards the sun reached a stable temperature of 260 k, ﬁ nd the constant of proportionality in the relationship between r and t, where t is in kelvin and r is in astronomical units. how close (in au) could this spacecraft be allowed to approach the sun if it could withstand a surface temperature of 1000 k? 4. whilst venus was making its closest approach to earth, a doppler radar, transmitting at a frequency of 1420 mhz, received an echo from venus which was ‘spread’ over a bandwidth of 17.1 hz.
calculate the speed at which the receding limb is travelling away from us with respect to the centre of venus and hence estimate, in earth days, how long venus takes to make one rotation about its axis. (assume the velocity of light is 3 " 105 km s!1. the non- relativistic doppler formula is given by ∆f/f # ∆v/c. venus has a diameter of 12 104 km.) extra-solar planets this is one of the most exciting areas of research being undertaken at the moment with the discovery of new planets being announced on a monthly basis. this chapter will describe the techniques that are being used to discover them and then discuss their properties. perhaps a word of warning might be in order. an obvious quest is to ﬁ nd planetary systems like our own which could, perhaps, contain planets that might harbour life. so far, to many astronomers’ surprise, the vast majority of solar systems found have been very unlike our own which might lead one to the conclusion that solar systems like ours are very rare. the author has even heard this point of view put forward by an eminent astro-biologist. at this time, one should not draw this conclusion.