for the critical (or zero curvature) universe which the cmb observations imply, the curve would have been expected to fall below the linear line for great distances. observations of distant type ia supernovae have recently enabled far greater distances to be measured which, together with the corresponding redshifts, have enabled the hubble plot to be extended to the point where the plot would no longer be linear. as expected, the plot is no longer linear but, to great surprise, the curve falls above the linear extrapolation, not below. this implies that the expansion of the universe is speeding up – not slowing down as expected – and is thus evidence that dark energy exists. 9.12.6 the nature of dark energy dark energy is known to be very homogeneous, not very dense (about 10!29 g cm!3) and appears not to interact through any of the fundamental forces other than gravity. this makes it very hard to detect in the laboratory. the simplest explanation for dark energy is that a volume of space has some intrinsic, fundamental energy as hypothesized by einstein with his cosmological constant. einstein’s special theory of relativity relates energy and mass by the relation e " mc2 and so this energy will have a gravitational effect.
it is often called a vacuum energy because it is the energy density of empty vacuum. in fact, most theories of particle physics predict vacuum ﬂ uctuations that would give the vac- uum exactly this sort of energy. one can perhaps get some feeling of why a pure vacuum can contain energy by realizing that it is not actually empty! heisenberg’s uncertainty principle allows particles to continuously come into existence and (quickly) go out of existence again. a pure vacuum is seething with these virtual particles! according then to heisenberg’s uncertainty principle there is an uncertainty in the amount of energy that can exist. this small uncertainty allows non-zero energy to exist for short intervals of time deﬁ ned by: cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 325 ∆e ! ∆t is of order h/2π where h is planck’s constant (6.626 ! 10"34 m2 kg s"1). as a result of the equivalence between matter and energy, these small energy ﬂ uctuations can produce particles of matter (a particle and its antiparticle must be produced simultaneously) which come into existence for a short time and then disappear.
as an example, consider a proton and the antiproton which have masses of 1.7 ! 10"24 g. if a virtual pair were to be created, their equivalent energy would be (from e # mc2) 3 ! 10"3 erg and thus they could only exist for a time of order 3 ! 10"25 s. a number of experiments have been able to detect this vacuum energy. one of these is the casimir experiment in which, in principle, two metal plates are placed very close together in a vacuum. in practice it is easier to use one plate and one plate which is part of a sphere of very large radius. one way to think of this is that the virtual particles have associated wavelengths – the wave particle duality. virtual particles whose wavelengths are longer than the separation of the plates cannot exist between them so there are more virtual particles on their outer sides and this imbalance gives the effect of an attractive force between the plates. an interesting analogy is when two ships sail alongside each other to transfer stores or fuel in the open sea in conditions with little wind but a signiﬁ cant swell.
between them, only waves whose wavelength is smaller than the separation of the hulls can exist but on the outside all wavelengths can be present. this inequal- ity gives rise to a force that tends to push the two ships apart, thus requiring that the ships actively steer away from each other. the cosmological constant is the simplest solution to the problem of cosmic acceleration with just one number successfully explaining a variety of obser- vations and has become an essential feature in the current standard model of cosmology. it is called the lambda–cold dark matter model, as it incorporates both cold dark matter and the cosmological constant, and can be used to predict the future of the universe. 9.13 the makeup of the universe the observations of the cmb, type ia supernovae, hubble’s constant and the distribution of galaxies in space all now give a consistent model of the universe. it appears that normal matter accounts for just ∼4%, dark matter ∼23% with the remaining ∼73% of the total mass energy content of the universe being in the form of dark energy. over the next few years, as the cmb observations are reﬁ ned, we will have pretty accurate values for these percentages.