(this was the case during 2007 close to sunspot minimum.) 2.7.2 the sunspot cycle the whole process then starts over again and is called the sunspot cycle. it is often said to be an 11 year cycle, though it can vary in length somewhat and the average length of the cycle over recent decades is 10.5 years. the following cycle has, however, one important difference; the ﬁ eld has the opposite polarity. hence, perhaps we should call it the 21 year solar cycle instead. figure 2.12 shows a plot of the sunspot numbers since 1600. the cyclical variation is very apparent. the plot shows two interesting features: a complete lack of sunspots during the late 1600s, called the maunder minimum; and increasing solar activity during the last 50 years. it is interesting to note that the river thames regularly froze during the ‘mini ice age’ at the time of the maunder minimum and the earth’s temperature is now rising. could it be that there is some connection between solar activity and global temperatures?
however, it should be noted that though solar activity has fallen somewhat in the last 20 years the earth’s temperature is still rising so the correlation has now been broken. figure 2.12 the averaged sunspot numbers over the last 400 years. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page85_img1.jpeg] our solar system 1 – the sun 65 2.8 prominences, ﬂ ares and the interaction of the solar wind with the earth’s atmosphere when the sun is observed in the light emitted by excited hydrogen at a time of solar eclipse, bright columns of gas are often seen stretching up from the chromo- sphere into the corona. these are called prominences. they are caused by dense ionized gas that is suspended by the sun’s magnetic ﬁ eld but ‘rains’ back from the corona into the chromosphere (figure 2.13). solar ﬂ ares, originating in the sun’s corona, are violent explosions whose energy is believed to be derived from the ‘breaking’ and then ‘reconnection’ of the sun’s magnetic ﬁ eld lines and the resulting ‘release’ of magnetic energy.
a total energy of between 1022 j and 1025 j, released over periods of minutes to hours, accelerates electrons, protons and heavier ions to relativistic speeds – that is, close to the speed of light. flares tend to occur above the active regions around sunspots, which is where intense magnetic ﬁ elds emerge from the sun’s surface into the corona, and thus tend to be more frequent at the time of solar maximum. flares are related to what are called coronal mass ejections, which are the ejection of material from the solar corona consisting largely of electrons and protons with small quantities of heavier elements such as helium, oxygen, and iron. the material carries with it elements of the coronal magnetic ﬁ eld. the streams of highly energetic particles have been observed to take as little as 15 min to reach the earth (so travelling at about one-third the speed of light). they can pose a threat to astronauts and have, in the past, destroyed satellite sub-systems. figure 2.13 a solar prominence. image: soho space observatory image, esa, nasa.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page86_img1.jpeg] 66 introduction to astronomy and cosmology interference with short-wave radio communication can also occur, and the interaction of the entrained magnetic ﬁ eld with electricity power transmission cables can cause problems and the possible shutdown of electricity grids –as hap- pened in the quebec province of canada in march 1989. 2.8.1 the aurora one beautiful manifestation of the interaction of the solar wind with our atmosphere is coloured light displays observed in the night sky (figure 2.14). they are most often seen within a band centred on the north and south magnetic poles and are known as the aurora borealis and aurora australis, respectively. (aurora is the roman god- dess of the dawn, boreas is the greek name for the north wind, and australis is the latin word for south.) the aurora borealis is often called the northern lights as it tends to be seen as a green or reddish glow in the northern sky. it is most commonly seen around the vernal and autumnal equinoxes, though it is not known why this should be so.