the newly discovered system resembles our own solar system more closely than any previously observed. whilst there are more than 250 planets now known to be orbiting other stars, there are only about 25 solar systems known to have multiple planets; this num- ber will surely rise as smaller planets fall within our detection methods. figure 4.9 artist’s impression of the 5.5 earth-mass planet which circles its red dwarf star with a period of 10 years. the planet has surface temperature of ∼220°c below zero. it is likely to have a thin atmosphere with a rocky core buried beneath a frozen icecap. image: eso press release march 2006. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page168_img1.jpeg] 148 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 4.4 astrometry the science of accurate positional measurement, called astrometry, is the oldest method that has been employed in the search for planets and in the 1950s and 1960s the discovery of several planets was claimed using this method.
sadly, none has since been conﬁ rmed and, by the end of 2007 no planets had been discovered by this method, though the hubble space telescope has conﬁ rmed the existence of a planet in orbit around gliese 876. the method consists of observing, with great precision, how a star’s position varies over time. all star systems are moving around the galaxy (our sun in ∼230 million years) and over short periods of time will move in essentially straight lines. however, if the star is in a binary or planetary system, the point that moves in a straight line is not the centre of the star but the barycentre of the system. so, as the star moves in a tiny circular or elliptical orbit about the barycenter, it will follow a wiggly path across the sky. as yet, except in the case of gliese 876, it has not been possible to produce observations of sufﬁ cient accuracy to allow the presence of a planet to be detected. a simple calculation might indicate why this is so. consider the star 51 pegasi. it lies at a distance of 3 315 500 km from the barycentre of its planetary system.
assuming that we are at right angles to the plane of its planet – which is the most favourable condition – then we could calculate the amplitude of the angular oscillation that would be observed as 51 pegasi moves across the heavens. (note that if the plane of 51 pegasi’s planet was at right angles to us, the radial velocity method could not have detected it!) let us take a distance for the star system of 30 light years which is ∼3 ! 1014 km. the angular motion in radians is thus ∼3 ! 106/3 ! 1014, which is 1 ! 10"8 rad or 0.002 arcsec. the angular resolution of the hubble space telescope is 0.05 arcsec but a very clever technique has enabled it to make measurements with a posi- tional accuracy of 0.0005 arcsec and so it would be able to detect the planet around 51 pegasi. as mentioned earlier, the hubble space telescope has been able to detect the planet in orbit around gliese 876, which lies at a distance of 15.6 light years and was ﬁ rst detected with the radial velocity method in 1998.
the radial velocity measurements combined with 2 years of the hubble space telescope astrometric measurements allow the orientation of the plane of the planetary orbits to be determined so that the actual, not just the minimum, mass of the planets in that system has been found. future spacecraft, such as nasa’s space interferometry mission (sim), should ﬁ nally attain a measurement precision of 1 µarcsec or 0.000001 arcsec. the mis- sion would thus have the capability to detect planets at considerably greater dis- tance than 30 light years. the astrometric method nicely complements the radial velocity and transit methods in that it is more sensitive to planets at larger orbital distances. however, extra-solar planets 149 such planets will have long orbital periods so observations over many years would be required for their detection. 4.5 discovery space figure 4.10 is complex but very instructive. it shows the range of planets, in both mass and separation from their star, which could be detected by the four meth- ods that have been discussed above.