if this is both invisible and exceeds a calculated mass of ∼3 solar masses, then it is likely to be a black hole. an excellent candidate in our own gal- axy is cygnus x-1 – so-called because it was the ﬁ rst x-ray source to be discovered in the constellation cygnus and is the brightest persistent source of high energy x-rays in the sky. usually called cyg x-1, it is a binary star system that contains a super-giant star with a surface temperature of 31 000 k (with its spectral type lying on the o and b boundary) together with a compact object. the mass of the super-giant is from 20 to 40 solar masses and observations of its orbital param- eters imply a companion of 8.7 solar masses. this is well above the 3 solar mass limit of a neutron star, so it is thought to be a black hole. figure 7.17 material accreting on to a black hole from a companion star. image: thierry lombry.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page282_img1.jpeg] 262 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 7.13.2 black holes are not entirely black in the 1970s, stephen hawking showed that due to quantum-mechanical effects, black holes actually emit radiation – they are not entirely black! the energy that produces the radiation in the way described below comes from the mass of the black hole. consequently, the black hole gradually loses mass and, perhaps sur- prisingly, the rate of radiation increases as the mass decreases, so the black hole continues to radiate with increasing intensity losing mass as it does so until it ﬁ nally evaporates. the theory describing why this happens is highly complex and results from the quantum mechanical concept of virtual particles – mass and energy can arise spontaneously provided they disappear again very quickly and so do not violate the heisenberg uncertainty principle. in what are called vacuum ﬂ uctuations, a particle and an antiparticle can appear out of nowhere, exist for a very short time, and then annihilate each other. should this happen very close to the event of a black hole, it can sometimes happen that one particle falls across the horizon, while the other escapes.
the particle that escapes carries energy away from the black hole and can, in principle, be detected so that it appears as if the black hole was emitting particles. black holes can be said to have an effective temperature, and unless this is less than the temperature of the universe the black hole cannot evaporate. this tem- perature is now ∼2.7 k – the remnant of the radiation left over from the big bang which will be discussed in chapter 9 – and is vastly higher than the effective tem- peratures of even solar mass black holes. eventually, in aeons, when the tempera- ture of this relict radiation has fallen sufﬁ ciently and assuming hawking’s theory is correct, stellar mass black holes may ﬁ nally begin to evaporate – on a timescale of 10100 years! 7.14 questions 1. a circular planetary nebula (like the ring nebula in figure 7.5) has an angular size of 2 arcmin and lies at a distance of ∼600 pc. doppler shift measurements show that the gaseous shell is expanding at a rate of 20 km s!1. how long ago was the planetary nebula formed? 2.
the ring nebula has an angular diameter of 72 arcsec. given that it is at a distance of ∼1500 pc, estimate its diameter. it is expanding at a velocity of 15 km s!1. estimate its age. 3. betelgeuse is a red giant at a distance of 428 light years. in the future it will become supernova similar to ‘tycho’s supernova’ which was observed in 1572 and lies at a distance of 9800 light years. at its peak, its brightness stellar evolution – the life and death of stars 263 was similar to that of venus (which has a peak magnitude of ∼!4). what might we expect the peak apparent magnitude of the betelgeuse supernova explosion to be? 4. a neutron star has a radius of 11.5 km and a mass of about 1.35msun. calculate the density of this neutron star in kilograms per cubic centimetre. compare the mass of mount everest (∼5 " 1010 kg) with the mass with 1 cm3 of neutron star material. (msun # 2 " 1030 kg.) 5.