this is comparable with the total luminosity of the galaxy in which the star resides! 7.9 type ii supernova this sequence of events is called a type ii supernova. the peak absolute mag- nitude of about –18 then drops by around six to eight magnitudes per year so that it gradually fades from view. we believe that such supernovae will occur in our galaxy on average about once every 44 years. sadly, the dust in the plane of the galaxy only allows us to see about 10–20% of these and so they are not often seen. stellar evolution – the life and death of stars 247 7.9.1 the crab nebula on july 4, 1054 ad a court astrologer during the sung dynasty, yang wei-t’e, observed a supernova in the constellation taurus. the gas shell thrown out in the supernova explosion was ﬁ rst discovered in modern times by john bevis in 1731, who included it in his sky atlas, uranographia britannica. later, in 1758, it was independently discovered by charles messier whilst he was searching for the return of halley’s comet.
it became the ﬁ rst object in the messier cata- logue with the name m1. the third earl of rosse, who drew its form using his 72 in. telescope in ireland, thought that it appeared similar to a horseshoe crab and so he called it the ‘crab nebula’, the name by which it is usually known (figure 7.9). the crab nebula is still, nearly 1000 years after it was ﬁ rst observed, expand- ing at a rate of 1500 km s!1 and its luminosity is about 10 000 times brighter than our sun. much of this radiation appears to be the result of electrons, moving close to the speed of light (called relativistic electrons), spiralling around magnetic ﬁ eld lines in the nebula. the fact that the nebula still appears so energetic remained a puzzle until a neutron star (which is the remnant of the stellar core) was discov- ered in 1969 at the centre of the nebula. this will be described in detail below.
the gas shell, now of order 6 " 4 arcmin in size and shining at 8.4 magnitudes, can still be observed with a small telescope. the crab nebula is thought to be the remains of a type ii supernova. a super- nova, (1987a) that was observed in the nearby galaxy, the large magellanic cloud, in 1987 is also thought to have been a type ii supernova, but those observed by tycho brahe in 1572 and johannes kepler in 1604 are thought to figure 7.9 the crab nebula. image: hubble space telescope, nasa, esa, j. hester, a. loll (asu). [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page268_img1.jpeg] 248 introduction to astronomy and cosmology have been caused by a different mechanism and are termed type i supernovae. these have proved very valuable for extending the cosmic distance scale out to distant galaxies and will be discussed in chapter 9.
7.9.2 supernova 1987a in febuary 1987, a supernova was observed in the large magellanic cloud, a gal- axy close to our own milky way (figure 7.10). visible for a while to the unaided eye, it became the closest observable supernova since that of 1604. supernova 1987a has played an important role in determining the cosmic distance scale as will be discussed in chapter 8. however, there is a further aspect of its explosion that merits mention which was the result of a wonderful piece of serendipitous timing. in the late 1970s a particle physics model called the grand uniﬁ ed theory (gut) suggested that protons would decay with a half-life of 1031 years. this means that if one observed a number of protons for 1031 years half would have decayed. this is obviously not an experiment that can be mounted, but the possible proton decay could be detected if one observed a very large num- ber of protons for a relatively short period. the proposed decay process is: p! → ε! ! πο πο → 2γ ε! !