airy realised the similarity of the predicted positions of the proposed planet and so, in july 1846, asked challis (at cambridge) to make a search for it. unfortunately, challis did not have a detailed star chart for the region where it was hoped that the new planet might be found so began to make one. if he then re-observed the positions of all the objects that he had charted, he would be able to spot the predicted planet by the fact that it would have moved slightly against the back- ground stars. on september 18 le verrier wrote to johann galle at the berlin observatory asking him to make a search. galle received this letter on september 23 and his colleague, heinrich d’arrest, pointed out that they had a newly observed star chart for the appropriate region of the sky and thus they could easily spot the planet if it were present in the ﬁ eld. they made the observation that night and it took just 30 min to locate the planet just 1° away from le verrier’s position!
in fact challis had noted on september 29 that one of 300 stars that he charted that night had showed a disc – just as a planet would – but, being a cautious man, had waited for further observations to show its motion through the stars. he had not been able to make them before the announcement of the planet’s discovery in the times newspaper dated october 1, 1846. our solar system 2 – the planets 123 william lassell, who had made a fortune in the brewery trade in liverpool, had built a 24 in. telescope and immediately made observations of the new planet in the hope of ﬁ nding any satellites. he started his observations on october 2 and on october 10 discovered neptune’s moon triton. the honour of neptune’s discovery is now shared by both adams and le verrier. it is interesting to note that their predictions of neptune’s orbit were not that good and that for only about 10 years, from 1840 to 1850, did their predictions agree reasonably well with neptune’s actual position.
more recently, the discovery of some papers that had been ‘misappropriated’ from the royal observatory at greenwich cast some doubt on adam’s claim and perhaps he does not deserve equal credit with le verrier. with hindsight, it is actually quite easy to predict where neptune was to be found. the diagram in figure 3.23 has been drawn in a rotating co-ordinate frame so that neptune appears ﬁ xed in space. as uranus is both orbiting the sun more rapidly and its orbit has a shorter circumference, it will pass neptune ‘on the inside track’. you will see that, as uranus nears neptune, the gravitational force between them will tend to advance uranus in its orbit, so it will appear ahead of where it would be expected to be (the solid disc, rather than the open circle). once uranus has passed beyond the position of neptune, their gravitational attraction will slow uranus down so that, eventually, it will have regained its expected position. one figure 3.23 the orbit of uranus in a frame of reference in which neptune is stationary.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page144_img1.jpeg] 124 introduction to astronomy and cosmology can see that neptune should lie beyond the position of uranus when uranus is furthest ahead of its predicted position. neptune is the fourth largest planet by diameter, and the third largest by mass, slightly more massive than its near-twin uranus. neptune’s atmosphere is pri- marily composed of hydrogen and helium along with ∼1% of methane which may help contribute to its vivid blue colour. winds in its atmosphere can reach 2000 km h!1, the highest of any planet. as voyager 2 passed neptune it observed a great black spot comparable with jupiter’s great red spot. from the cloud tops at ∼55 k to its core at 7000 k, neptune has the greatest temperature range of any planet. its sidereal rotation period is roughly 16.11 h long and it has a similar axial tilt to that of the earth. neptune and uranus are often considered ice giants, given their smaller size and greater percentages of ice in their composition relative to jupiter and saturn. neptune’s core is composed of rock and ice, having ∼1 earth mass.