at the bottom right is valles marinaris, a canyon four times as deep and three times as long as the grand canyon on earth. on the left are several volcanoes including olympus mons, a volcano three times higher than mt everest. at the top is the north polar cap made of thawing water ice and ‘dry ice’ (solid carbon dioxide). image: msss, jpl, nasa. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page124_img1.jpeg] 104 introduction to astronomy and cosmology inﬂ uenced by schiaparelli’s observations, percival lowell founded an observa- tory at flagstaff, arizona (later famous for the discovery of pluto) where he made detailed observations of mars which showed an intricate grid of canals. however, as telescopes became larger, fewer canali were seen though the surface showed distinct features. they appear to have been an optical illusion but the myth of advanced life on mars was not ﬁ nally dispelled until nasa’s mariner spacecraft reached mars in the 1960s.
(an intriguing image of a huge rock formation, called ‘the face on mars’, was obtained by the viking 1 spacecraft in 1961 leading some to suspect that this was a giant representation of a past civilization. however, a detailed photograph taken by mars global surveyor in 2001 showed it to be a ‘mesa’ – a broad, ﬂ at topped rock outcrop with steep sides.) the detailed images taken by the mariner spacecraft showed giant canyons and vast volcanoes. one of these, olympus mons, is the largest known volcano in the solar system with a caldera of 85 km in width surmounting the volcanic cone whose base is 550 km in diameter. the caldera is nearly 27 km above the martian surface, three times higher than everest! it was realised that when these giant volcanoes were active, some 3000 million years ago, they would have given mars a far thicker atmosphere than now and the effects of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere would have allowed the surface temperature to be sufﬁ ciently high for water to exist on the surface.
other visible surface features gave ample evidence of water ﬂ ow over the surface leading to speculation that simple life forms might then have existed on mars. this possibility led to two viking landers being sent to mars in 1976. as well as imaging the surface and collecting scientiﬁ c data, their objective was to search for any evidence of life. they conducted three experiments which, though discovering unexpected chemical activity in the martian soil provided no clear evidence for the presence of any living organisms. as mars has a very thin atmosphere (and no ozone layer), far more ultraviolet light reaches the sur- face than on earth. this would prevent the existence of life above ground. if life had once arisen on mars, one could now only expect to ﬁ nd evidence for it beneath the surface. since then, many spacecraft have reached mars. two rovers, spirit and oppor- tunity, have roamed across mars and provided proof that water once existed on the surface (figure 3.14). only one lander, beagle 2, has attempted to directly search for evidence of simple life since the 1970s but, sadly, it appeared to have crash landed on christmas day 2003.
mars has two moons, phobos and deimos, which may be captured asteroids (see next section). phobos is a small, irregularly shaped object about 22 km in diameter (figure 3.15). it orbits mars at a height of 9377 km, closer than any other satellite to its planet and moves so fast around mars that it actually rises in the west and sets in the east. deimos is just 6 km across in a nearly circular orbit. our solar system 2 – the planets 105 it takes just over 30 h to complete one orbit, not that much greater than mars’s rotation period so it will remain visible for ∼2.7 days between rising and setting. it would appear star like as it subtends an angle of just 2.5 arcsec and is about as bright as the planet venus appears to us. figure 3.14 a martian panorama imaged by the the spirit rover at gusev crater. image: mars exploration rover mission, cornell, jpl, nasa. figure 3.15 phobos imaged by the mars reconnaissance orbiter in march 2008. image: hirise, mro, lpl (u.