it is about 50% larger than our moon and 80% more massive, and is second only to jupiter’s moon ganymede in size and larger (but not as massive) as mercury. like our moon, it is tidally locked and always presents the same face to saturn. titan has a relatively smooth crust composed of water ice which overlays a rocky interior. the atmosphere is quite dense, largely made up of nitrogen (∼98%) giving a surface pressure of more than one and a half times that of the earth. within the atmosphere are clouds of methane and ethane and an orange haze made up of organic molecules that result from the break up of methane in the atmosphere by ultraviolet light from the sun. the source of this methane is somewhat of a mystery, as the sun’s ultraviolet light should eliminate methane from the atmosphere in about 50 million years. it is not impossible that it has a biological origin! observations, ﬁ rst from the hubble space telescope and then from the cassini spacecraft (in infrared light to observe through the haze) show that titan’s surface is marked by broad swaths of bright and dark terrain. the largest feature is xanadu, about the size of australia.
a sophisticated radar system carried by the cassini spacecraft showed evidence for hydrocarbon seas, lakes and a network of tributaries near the north pole so ﬁ nally conﬁ rming the presence of liquid methane on the surface. 116 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the huygens probe on december 25, 2004 the huygens probe separated from the cassini orbiter that had carried it to saturn and, having been lowered through its atmo- sphere by parachute, landed on the surface of titan on january 14, 2005 (figure 3.20). images of the surface taken from a height of ∼16 km showed what are considered to be drainage channels in light coloured higher ground leading down to the shoreline of a darker sea or plain. some of the photos even seemed to suggest islands and a mist shrouded coastline. there was no evidence of any liquids at the time of landing, but strong evidence of its presence in the recent past. as the spacecraft landed, a penetrometer studied its de-acceleration. it was initially thought that the surface had a hard crust overlaying a sticky mate- rial.
one scientist compared the colour and texture of the surface with that of a crème brûlée, and another, with stepping on a cowpat! however, it may have been that the craft landed on, and then displaced, a pebble on the sur- face giving the effect of a surface crust and the surface may, in fact, consist of ‘sand’ made up of ice grains forming a flat plain covered with pebbles made of water ice. figure 3.20 a panorama of the surface of titan taken as the huygen’s probe was descending through its atmosphere. image: esa, nasa, descent imager/spectral radiometer team (lpl). [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page137_img1.jpeg] our solar system 2 – the planets 117 3.5.9 uranus mass 8.68 !
1025 kg 14.536 times that of earth radius (equatorial) 25 560 km radius (polar) 24 973 km rotation period 0.378 days axial tilt 97.77° semi-major axis of orbit 2 876 697 082 km 19.23 au orbital period 30 799 095 days 84.32 years average orbital speed 6.81 km s"1 eccentricity 0.0444 orbital inclination 0.772° uranus was the ﬁ rst planet to have been discovered in modern times and though, at magnitude ∼5.5, it is just visible to the unaided eye without a telescope it would have been impossible to show that it was a star rather than a planet, save for its slow motion across the heavens. even when telescopes had come into use, their relatively poor optics meant that it was charted as a star many times before it was recognised as a planet by william herschel in 1781.