this is precisely the region that would have been invisible to those living at a latitude of 36° north. due to precession, the stars that would be hidden from view in this region will vary with time, and this enables us to give a date, about 2600–2900 bc, when the constellations were delineated. this origin would also explain the reason behind the long, thin constellation hydra, the sea serpent, that now arcs across 95° of the sky – hydra then followed the line of the celestial equator. the ancient greek poet, aratus, described how some stars set as others rose into the night sky at opposite points on the horizon. again, due to precession, such coincidences will also depend on the latitude of the observer and the time of observation. these observations also imply a latitude of about 36° north and a date about 2600 bc. 1.6 time before one can appreciate the observations that lay behind a second observational triumph, which came about from the precise observations of the positions of the stars and planets by tycho brahe in the seventeenth century, it is necessary to understand how astronomers measure time.
1.6.1 local solar time for centuries, the time of day was directly linked to the sun’s passage across the sky, with 24 h being the time between one transit of the sun across the meridian and that on the following day. this time standard is called ‘local solar time’ and is the time indicated on a sundial. the time such clocks would show would thus vary across the uk, as noon is later in the west. it is surprising the difference this makes. in total, the uk stretches 9.55° in longitude from lowestoft in the east to mangor beg in county fermanagh, northern ireland in the west. as 15° is equivalent to 1 h, this is a time difference of just over 38 min! 1.6.2 greenwich mean time as the railways progressed across the uk, this difference became an embarrass- ment and so london or ‘greenwich’ time was applied across the whole of the uk. a further problem had become apparent as clocks became more accurate: due to the fact that the earth’s orbit is elliptical the length of the day varies slightly.
thus, 24 h, as measured by clocks, was deﬁ ned to be the average length of the day over 1 year. this time standard became known as greenwich mean time (gmt). 12 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 1.6.3 the equation of time the use of gmt has the consequences that, during the year, our clocks get in and out of step with the sun. the difference between gmt and the local solar time at greenwich is called the ‘equation of time’(figure 1.8). the result is that the sun is not always due south at noon, even in london, and the sun can transit (cross the meridian) up to 16 min 33 s before noon as measured by a clock giving gmt and up to 14 min 6 s afterwards. this means that sunrise and sunset are not usu- ally symmetrically centred on midday and this does give a noticeable effect around christmas time.
though the shortest day is on december 21, the winter solstice, the earliest sunset is around december 10 and the latest sunrise does not occur until january 2, so the mornings continue to get darker for a couple of weeks after december 21 whilst, by the beginning of january, the evenings are appreciably longer. 1.6.4 universal time greenwich mean time was formally replaced by universal time (ut) in 1928 (although the title has not yet come into common usage) but was essentially the same as gmt until 1967 when the deﬁ nition of the second was changed! prior to this, 1 s was deﬁ ned as 1/86 400th of a mean day as determined by the rotation of the earth. the rotation rate of the earth was thus our fundamental time stan- dard. the problem with this deﬁ nition is that, due to the tidal forces of the moon, figure 1.8 the ‘equation of time’ – the diﬀ erence between gmt and local solar time at greenwich observatory. image: wikipedia commons.