as will be discussed in chapter 7, one of the strongest sources of gravitational wave emission would be the coalescence of two neutron stars (each typically weighing more than 1 solar figure 5.32 the ‘moon’s shadow’ as observed by the soudan 2 muon detector. image: argonne national laboratory, and minnesota, tufts and western washington universities, usa, and oxford university and the rutherford appleton laboratory, uk. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page220_img1.jpeg] 200 introduction to astronomy and cosmology mass) to form a black hole. at the time of writing, though indirect evidence of such emission has been obtained, no gravitational wave has yet been detected by a gravitational wave detector. it is, however, expected that such a direct detection will be made on a timescale of a few years as the current detectors are made more sensitive and so could detect such events across a wide volume of the universe. the effect of a passing gravitational wave is to produce a tiny distortion of space–time that could give rise to a temporary distortion of a shape, say a sphere, of material by a factor of less than 1 part in 1020.
it is somewhat amazing that such a small effect could be detected! the simplest, and ﬁ rst to be built, type of gravitational wave detector is called a weber bar – a large cylinder of metal with electronic devices strapped around it to detect the vibrations induced by a passing gravitational wave. modern versions are cryogenically cooled and use superconducting quantum interference devices to detect any motion. unfortunately, weber bars are not very sensitive but could, for example, detect a nearby supernova explosion. more sensitive detectors use laser interferometers to detect the slight change in the separation of masses placed many hundreds of metres to several kilometres apart. in the usa, at richland, washington and livingston, louisiana, are two ground-based inter- ferometers forming the laser interferometer gravitational wave observatory (ligo) (figure 5.33). figure 5.33 the livingston, louisiana ligo gravitational wave detector. image: ligolivingston.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page221_img1.jpeg] observing the universe 201 each comprises two 4 km arms at right angles to each other whose lengths will be changed by a passing gravitational wave by no more than 10!17 m – only a frac- tion of the width of a proton! laser beams pass through vacuum tubes to measure any difference in the separation of test masses at the ends of the arms and enable ligo’s interferometers to detect changes at the level required. upgrades to ligo were funded in 2008 to improve its sensitivity by at least a factor of 10 to form advanced ligo. for a given event, such as the coalescence of two neutron stars, this will expand the volume in which it could be detected by a factor of 1000. as a result, such events are expected to be detected several times a day. the passing of a gravitational wave must be detected in the presence of seismic noise, not just from earthquakes, but passing cars and trains and waves reaching the nearby coastline.
the test masses are thus suspended by a series of wire frames to ﬁ lter out seismic noise and the whole assembly is mounted on a support which has accelerometers to measure major disturbances and apply an opposing correc- tion. this works in a very similar way to that employed in modern camera lenses to provide image stabilization. a space-based interferometer called the laser interferometer space antenna (lisa) is also being developed (figure 5.34). here, three test masses will be placed in spacecraft, 5 million km apart, forming a 60° triangle. lasers will span the distance between them, detecting the minute changes in their separation as a gravitational wave passes through space. although lisa will not be affected by seismic noise, it will be affected by other means, such as the sun’s radiation pressure and solar wind, figure 5.34 the laser interferometer space antenna (lisa). image: nasa. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page222_img1.jpeg] 202 introduction to astronomy and cosmology which would change the relative positions of the test mass. to overcome this, the test masses effectively ﬂ oat free in space protected by their surrounding spacecraft.