its path thus crosses the celes- tial equator twice every year: once at the vernal equinox, on march 20 or 21, as it comes into the northern hemisphere and 6 months later when, at the autumnal equinox on september 22 or 23, it returns to the southern hemisphere. figure 1.6 the celestial sphere. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page29_img1.jpeg] astronomy, an observational science 9 just as a location on the earth’s surface has a ‘latitude’, deﬁ ned as its angular distance from the equator towards the poles, so a star has a ‘ declination’” (dec) given as an angle which is either positive (in the northern hemisphere) or nega- tive (in the southern hemisphere). the ‘pole star’ in the northern sky is close to the north celestial pole at close to !90 declination and the region at the south celestial pole (where there is no bright star) is at "90 declination. the second coordinate proves to be rather more difﬁ cult. on the earth we deﬁ ne the position of a location round the earth by its longitude.
however, there has to be some arbitrary zero of longitude. it was sensible that the zero of longitude, called the prime meridian, should pass through a major observatory and that honour ﬁ nally fell to the royal greenwich observatory in london. as referred to above, the path of the sun gives two deﬁ ned points along the celestial equator that might sensibly be used as the zero of right ascension (ra) – the points where the ecliptic crosses the celestial equator at the vernal and autumnal equinoxes. the point where the sun moves into the northern hemi- sphere was chosen and was given the name ‘the ﬁ rst point of aries’ as this was the constellation in which it lay. star positions are measured eastwards around the celestial sphere from the ﬁ rst point in aries to give the star’s ra. however, for reasons that will become apparent when we describe how star positions are measured, ra is not measured in degrees but in time, with 24 h equivalent to 360°. hence, the celestial sphere is split into 24 segments each of 1 h and equivalent to 15° around the celestial equator.
angular measure a great circle measures 360° in angular extent. each degree is divided into 60 arcmin. each arcminute is divided into 60 arcsec. there are then 3600 arcsec in 1°. (arcseconds and arcminutes can also be written as seconds of arc and minutes of arc, respectively.) 1.5 precession should you locate the point where the sun crosses the ecliptic at the vernal equinox on a star chart (with position: ra # 0:00 h, dec # 0.0°), you might be surprised to ﬁ nd that it is not in aries, but in the adjacent constellation pisces. this is the result of the precession of the earth’s rotation axis in just the same way that the axis of rotation of a spinning top or gyroscope is seen to precess. the precession 10 introduction to astronomy and cosmology rate is slow; one rotation every ∼26 000 years, but its effect over the centuries is to change the positions of stars as measured with the co-ordinate system described above, which is ﬁ xed to the earth. consequently, a star chart is only valid for one speciﬁ c date.
current star charts show the positions of stars as they were at the start of the millennium and will state ‘epoch 2000’ in their titles. one result of precession is that the pole star is only close to the north celestial pole at this par- ticular moment in time in the precession cycle (figure 1.7). in ∼12 000 years, the bright star vega will be near the north celestial pole instead (though by no means as close). it also means that constellations currently not observable from the uk will become visible above the southern horizon. interestingly, it is stars in the part of the sky that was visible to ancient astronomers and which were thus included in the constellations that enable us to estimate not only the time but also the latitude from which the constellations were delineated and named. a region of about 36° radius in the southern sky did not contain any of the original 48 constellations implying that this region was invisible to those who figure 1.7 the path of the north celestial pole through the heavens. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page31_img1.jpeg] astronomy, an observational science 11 mapped the sky.