in december 1962 the mariner 2 spacecraft ﬂ ew over the surface at a distance of ∼35 000 km and microwave and infrared observations showed that, whilst the cloud tops were very cool, the surface was at a temperature of at least 425°c. it found no evidence of a magnetic ﬁ eld. the russians made many, initially unsuccessful, attempts to land spacecraft on the surface. no one had anticipated an atmospheric pressure of ∼100 times that of the earth’s. as a result, the descent parachutes were initially too large. this slowed the spacecraft’s descent with the result that its batteries discharged before the craft reached the surface. other craft were crushed by the great pressure in the lower atmosphere. finally, in 1970, venera 7 reached the surface send- ing temperature telemetry back for 23 min and then vereras 9 and 10 sent back the ﬁ rst images of the surface revealing scattered boulders and basalt-like rock slabs (figure 3.7).
on their way to observe halley’s comet in 1985 two russian vega craft sent balloon craft into the atmosphere which ﬂ ew at an altitude of ∼53 km above the surface and showed that there were high winds within a highly turbulent atmosphere. radar observations, initially from earth, and then from an orbiting nasa spacecraft, magellan, have given us detailed information about the surface struc- ture. in 4.5 years, magellan mapped 98% of venus’s surface with very high resolution. about 80% of the surface comprises smooth volcanic plains with the remainder forming highland regions, one in the northern hemisphere and one just south of the equator. the northern ‘continent’ is called ishtar terra, and is about the size of australia and named after the babylonian goddess of love. it rises to a peak of 11 km above the plains in the maxwell montes. the southern ‘continent’, called aphrodite terra after the greek goddess of love, is somewhat larger having a surface area comparable with south america.
the surface has impact craters, mountains and valleys along with a unique type of pancake-like, volcanic feature, called farras, which is up to 50 km in diameter and 1 km high. figure 3.7 basalt plain image from venus by the venera 14 lander. image: soviet academy of sciences. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page112_img1.jpeg] 92 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the surface is thought to be ∼500 million years old and, as a result, we see far more volcanoes than on earth, where those older than ∼100 million years will have been eroded. there are 167 volcanoes visible on venus that are over 100 km across. the amount of sulphur dioxide in the atmosphere appears to be variable, which could indicate ongoing volcanic activity. the atmosphere has been shown to largely consist of carbon dioxide with a small amount of nitrogen. its mass is 93 times that of the earth and results in an atmospheric pressure at the surface that is about 92 times that on the earth. it contains thick clouds of sulphur dioxide and sulphuric acid may even ‘rain’ in the upper atmosphere!
however, due to the surface temperature of over 460°c, this ‘rain’ would never reach the surface. this very high surface temperature is the result of the greenhouse gas effect of the very thick carbon dioxide atmosphere. it is thought that venus has a very similar internal structure to that of the earth with a core, mantle and crust. the lack of plate tectonics – the relative movements of parts of the crust – may have prevented its interior cooling to the same extent as that of our earth and it is thought that its interior is partially liquid. venus is almost a twin to our earth with a diameter just 650 km less and a mass 81.5% that of our planet but, once thought to have had an atmosphere much more like ours, evolution has taken it down a very different path! 3.5.3 the earth mass 5.9736 !