relativity and the global positioning system travelling around the globe at a speed of 3.9 km s#1, the atomic clocks providing the time signals in the gps satellite constellation will lose ∼7.2 µs day#1 as measured by clocks on the ground. (you could try this calculation.) it should however be pointed out that there is an even greater effect due to the fact that the gps clocks are in a weaker gravitational ﬁ eld. this makes them run fast compared with clocks on the ground by 45.9 µs day#1. combining the two effects gives a net offset of "38.7 µs day#1. to account for this, the frequency standards on board the gps satellites are given a rate offset prior to launch, making them run slightly slow – they are set to 10.22999999543 mhz instead of 10.23 mhz. 1.7 a second major observational triumph: the laws of planetary motion we are now in a position to describe the observations which led to a further major improvement in our understanding of the solar system.
astronomy, an observational science 17 1.7.1 tycho brahe’s observations of the heavens in 1572, tycho brahe, a young danish nobleman whose passion was astronomy, observed a supernova (a very bright new star) in the constellation of cassiopeia. his published observations of the new ‘star’ shattered the widely held belief that the heavens were immutable and he became a highly respected astronomer. he realised that in order to show when further changes in the heavens might take place it was vital to have a ﬁ rst class catalogue of the visible stars. four years later, tycho was given the island of hven by the king of denmark and money to build a castle that he called uraniborg, named after urania, the greek goddess of the heavens. in the castle’s grounds, he built a semi-underground observatory called stjerneborg. for a period of 20 years, his team of observers made positional measurements of the stars and, critically important, the planets. figure 1.10b shows the observatory and figure 1.11 indicates how the measure- ments were made.
an observer sighted a star (or planet) through a small window on a south facing wall. he did two things. first, he was able to indicate to his assistants when the star crossed the meridian. (the meridian is the half-circle that runs across the sky through the zenith between the north and south poles and intersects the horizon due south.) secondly, by using a giant quadrant equipped with vernier scales, he was able to measure the elevation (angular height above the horizon) of the star at the moment of transit. one assistant is standing beside the clock at the lower right of the diagram to measure the time at which the star transits and a second assistant is seated at a table at the lower left who would then note the elevation of the star and time of transit in the logbook. from figure 1.12 you can see that, given its observed elevation and the latitude of the observatory, the declination of the star can be found directly. figure 1.10 tycho brahe’s castle, uraniborg (a), and his observatory, stjerneborg (b), on the island of hven. image: wikipedia commons.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page38_img1.jpeg] 18 introduction to astronomy and cosmology figure 1.11 observing the elevation of a star as it transited due south. observatory image: wikipedia commons. note, on the original, the window is too high. figure 1.12 the geometry showing how the declination of a star is derived. the zenith is the point directly above the observer. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page39_img1.jpeg] [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page39_img2.jpeg] astronomy, an observational science 19 the time of the transit gives the ra. let us now suppose that tycho brahe set his clock to measure sidereal time. if he now set his clock to read 0:00 h at the time when the first point of aries crossed the meridian, then the time when a star crossed the meridian would directly give the ra! you can now see how the convention that ra is measured in units of time and increases to the east came about. today, transit telescopes, such as that at the royal greenwich observatory, are used to measure stellar positions.