2.66 " 10#6 rad. giving l ! 1.022 km. as a result of the mutual attraction of the earth and the moon, the moon will actually follow the curved path ac which can be thought of as being made up of the straight line motion ab and a fall bc, the distance fallen by the moon in 1 s. let the distance from the centre of the earth, point e, to a be r and from e to b be d. finally let the distance from b to c be d. as the orbit is circular, the distance from e to c is also r. with this notation, d ! d # r in the right-angled triangle abe, r/d ! cos θ, or d ! r/cos θ. hence, d ! d # r ! r/cos θ # r ! r [(1/cos θ) # 1]. now θ is a very small angle, so we may write: cos θ ! 1 # (θ2/2) where θ is in radians.
using the binomial theorem to ﬁ nd 1/cosθ, and ignoring all but the ﬁ rst two terms (θ is very small) we get: 1/cos θ ! 1 $ (θ2/2). substituting in the expression for bc, we obtain: d ! r " θ2/2 ! [3.84 " 108 m " (2.66 " 10#6)2] /2 ! 1.36 " 10#3 m. so, in 1 s, the moon falls vertically towards the earth by just over 1 mm. astronomy, an observational science 29 let us assume that the acceleration due to gravity at the distance of the moon is gm, then this fall would be equal to ½gmt2 so that gm is 0.00272 m s!2. this is considerably less than the value of 9.81 at the earth’s surface, so the force of gravity must fall off as the distance between the two objects increases. the value of g at the distance of the moon compared with that at the earth’s surface was 0.00272/9.81 " 2.77 # 10!4.
this is a ratio of 1/3606. newton knew that the radius of the earth was 6400 km, so that the moon, at a dis- tance of 384 000 km, was precisely 60 times further away from the centre of the earth than the earth’s surface. hence, the value of g at the distance of the moon had fallen almost precisely by the ratio of the distances from the centre of the earth squared! this led newton to his famous inverse square law: the force of gravitational attraction between two bodies decreases with increasing distance between them as the inverse of the square of that distance. however, newton had a problem: he felt that he could not publish his law until he could prove that the gravitational pull exerted by a spherical body was pre- cisely the same as if all the mass were concentrated at its centre. this can only be proved by calculus and it took newton a while to develop the ideas of calculus, which he called ‘ ﬂ uxions’. it was only then that he felt conﬁ dent enough to pres- ent his theory to the world.
the proof is not difﬁ cult, but rather long: as a sphere can be regarded as set of thin nested shells, the required proof is to show that the gravitational attrac- tion of a thin shell is as if all its mass were concentrated at its geometrical centre. you will thus see that there is no requirement that the body is uniformly dense (the earth certainly is not) but it does require that the density at a given distance from the centre is constant – the body must have a spherically symmetric mass distribution. newton realized that the force of gravity must also be directly proportional to the object’s mass. also, based on his third law of motion, he knew that when the earth exerts its gravitational force on an object, such as the moon, that object must exert an equal and opposite force on the earth. he thus reasoned that, due to this symmetry, the magnitude of the force of gravity must be proportional to both the masses. his law thus stated that the force, f, between two bodies is directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the distance between their centres.