an observer might use the b-v index and a theorist would be likely to use temperature, regarding this as being the most fundamental. on the plot shown in figure 6.6, both the spectral type and the temperature are given. the vertical axis is a measure of brightness. here, a theoretician might well use a star’s luminosity compared with the sun, whilst an observer would use abso- lute magnitude. russell used the absolute magnitude for this ordinate, but this author prefers the use of luminosity as giving a better understanding of the rela- tive brightness of the stars. when plots are used using the colour index and abso- lute magnitude, they are often called a colour–magnitude diagram rather than an h–r diagram (figure 6.7). to provide a totally true diagram, all stars within a volume of space sufﬁ ciently large to include a reasonable number of the very rare 0 type stars would need to be plotted – this would be known as a complete sample.
this is very difﬁ cult to achieve as, in this case, the volume is so large that the majority of the faintest stars, those of type m, would be too faint to be detected, so the plot presented is not a com- pletely true reﬂ ection of the relative numbers of the different types of stars. it does, however, show where a representative sample of stars lie on the h–r diagram. 6.9.1 the main sequence the main sequence is an s-shaped region that extends from the top left (very bright, high surface temperature o type stars) down to the bottom right (faint, low surface temperature m type stars) of figure 6.6. it is the region which includes between 80% and 90% of all stars. the stars at the lower right of the main sequence are called red dwarfs as their luminosity is far less than that of our sun. 6.9.2 the giant region above the main sequence on the right-hand side of figure 6.6 is an area of bright stars whose colours range through yellow, orange and red.
as these stars are very bright they are called giant stars, such as the star aldebaran, in taurus, which is called a red giant (though they actually appear orange in colour). at the top of figure 6.6 is a region, extending from the blue through to the red, of exceedingly bright stars which are called supergiants. betelgeuse, in orion, at the extreme top right of the plot is a red supergiant. in contrast, at the extreme top left of the plot is the star rigel, the brightest star in orion, whose luminosity we calculated to be ∼45 000 times that of the sun. this is termed a blue supergiant. the properties of stars 221 figure 6.7 colour–magnitude diagram of the 16 631 brightest stars from the hipparcos catalogue showing the number of stars in given colour–magnitude cells. (note that this greatly overemphasizes the number of bright stars as they can be seen at great distances.) image: hipparcos space astrometry mission, esa.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page242_img1.jpeg] 222 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 6.9.3 the white dwarf region below the main sequence lies a region in which white dwarf stars are found. (they encompass a wide surface temperature range and are not necessarily white.) the companion to sirius, in canis major, is a white dwarf. as we will see in chapter 7 white dwarfs are the remnants of stars like our sun. they are very small, about the size of the earth, so even those with very high surface temperatures are not very luminous. 6.9.4 pressure broadening as a red dwarf and a red giant or red supergiant can all have the same surface temperature, one might well ask how they can be distinguished. obviously their measured luminosity is a major factor but, in addition, their spectra appear differ- ent. it is possible to measure the width of spectral lines and it is found that those of the giant stars are less than those of the dwarf stars. as we will shortly see, the outer envelopes of red giant stars are very tenuous with a very low gas pressure whereas the pressure in the atmosphere of m type dwarfs is far higher.