(heavy water is water which has a deuteron rather than a proton as its nucleus.) every day of operation about 10 solar neutrinos react with a deuteron, the reaction giving rise to two protons and a very high energy electron. this travels at a speed faster than the speed of light in the liquid. it thus produces a shock wave akin to that produced by a supersonic plane. this shockwave produces blue light in the form of ‘cherenkov’ radiation which spreads out in a cone. the tank is surrounded by 916 photon detectors which detect the cherenkov radiation (around 50 photons per event) and can even deﬁ ne the direction of the incoming neutrino so it is possible to measure the number of solar neutrinos detected. the sudbury detector conﬁ rmed that only ∼33% of the expected number of electron neutrinos was arriving from the sun. in a follow-up experiment, 2 t of high-purity table salt (nacl) were added to the heavy water in order to provide three times better sensitivity to the muon and tau neutrinos.
it appears that the total number of neutrinos detected with a solar origin does agree well with that predicted for the total number of electron neutri- nos that the sun should produce. the only way that this could be the case is if the electron neutrinos can change (the word ‘ oscillate’ is used) into one of the other two types en route from the sun. it was thought that electron neutrinos were, like photons, were mass-less. however, if the neutrino does have mass it can oscillate into muon or tau neutrinos. it is thought that on their way from the core of the sun to the earth the neutrinos will evenly distribute themselves amongst the three types – thus only one-third of the electron neutrinos emitted by the sun will remain to be detected – exactly as observed. the neutrino problem is solved! our solar system 1 – the sun 59 2.5 the solar atmosphere: photosphere, chromosphere and corona when the sun is observed (taking great care to use the appropriate ﬁ lters) it appears to have a sharp edge but there is, of course, no actual ‘surface’.
we are, in fact, just seeing down through the solar atmosphere to a depth where the gas becomes what is called ‘optically thick’. this deepest visible layer of the atmosphere is called the photosphere (as this is where the photons that we see originate from) and is about 500 km thick (figure 2.8). the temperature falls from ∼6500 k at its base to ∼4400 k at its upper region. as was derived earlier, the effective temperature of the photosphere is ∼5800 k. the convective transport of energy from below gives rise to a mottling of the surface – solar granulations that are about 1000 km across. each granulation cell last about 5–10 min as hot gas, having risen from below the surface radiates energy away, cools and sinks down again. figure 2.8 the photosphere of the sun showing granulations and sunspot groups. image: soho space observatory, nasa, esa. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page80_img1.jpeg] 60 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the region, about 2000 km thick, above the photosphere, is called the chromosphere.
the gas density in this region falls by a factor of about 10 000 and the temperature increases from ∼4400 k at the top of the photosphere to about 25 000 k. above this is the transition region, in which the temperature rises very rapidly over a distance of a few hundred kilometres to a temperature of ∼1 million k. the transition region leads into the outer region of the sun called the solar corona where temperatures reach in excess of 2 million k (figure 2.9). its form and extent depends strongly on the solar activity that varies through what is called the sun spot cycle but, typically, extends for several solar radii into what is called the heliosphere. at the time of solar minima when activity is low it usually extends further from the sun at its equator and the pattern of the sun’s magnetic ﬁ eld is often well delineated near its poles. at solar maxima, the overall shape is more uniform and has a complex structure. the density is very low, ∼1014 times less than that at the earth’s surface, and its brightness at visible wavelengths is about a million times less than that of the photosphere.