the width of an emitted spectral line in gas of higher pressure is broadened in comparison with that in a low pressure due to a phenomenon called pressure broadening: an atom which is able to emit a photon of energy unhindered will produce a narrow band of emitted frequencies but if this atom collides with another atom during the emission process (which will happen far more often at higher pressures), the emitted wave train is shortened in comparison, and this gives rise to a wider range of frequencies – a broader spectral line. this same effect is seen in the absorption lines of stars with red giants having narrower spectral lines than red dwarfs. the reason why most stars are seen to lie on the main sequence is simply because this is where stars spend the majority of their life as stable objects produc- ing energy by the nuclear fusion of hydrogen to helium. as stars evolve, their posi- tion in the h–r diagram changes and a star is said to move along an evolutionary track across the h–r diagram. the tracks of stars of different stellar types will be discussed in chapter 7. the main sequence is not a line but, as shown, is a band across the h–r diagram.
this is because, as they age, stars become somewhat more luminous with an increased surface temperature. they thus move some- what up and to the left of the diagram during their hydrogen burning phase. the giant phase in the life of a star is relatively brief which is why we see far fewer stars of this type. the white dwarfs are the ﬁ nal states of many stars and gradually cool over billions of years thus moving down and to the right of the h–r diagram. over time, as more of the stars in our galaxy come to the end of their lives, their numbers will increase relative to those on the main sequence. the properties of stars 223 6.10 the size of stars 6.10.1 direct measurement the angular sizes of relatively nearby stars can be measured directly. the dia- meter of our sun, calculated earlier, comes from knowledge of its angular size and distance. there is only one star, betelgeuse (a red supergiant in orion), whose angular size can be directly observed with a normal telescope.
in 1995, the faint object camera of the hubble space telescope (hst) was used to cap- ture the ﬁ rst conventional telescope image of betelgeuse and measured an angu- lar size of ∼0.05 arcsec (figure 6.8). (betelgeuse has a very diffuse outer envelope so it is rather hard to estimate the angular size.) the distance to betelgeuse is not precisely known but, if it is assumed to be 131 pc, then one can calculate the diameter: d ! d θ figure 6.8 hubble space telescope image of betelgeuse. image: a. dupree (cfa), nasa, esa. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page244_img1.jpeg] 224 introduction to astronomy and cosmology with θ in radians and d (the diameter) and d (the distance) in kilometres we get: d ! 131 " 3.1 " 1013 " [0.05/(3600 " 57.3)] km !
4.1 " 1015 " 2.4 " 10−7 km so the diameter is ∼1 billion km, about 700 times that of the sun. a method called optical interferometry uses two or more mirrors separated by distances of order tens of metres and combines their light to give the effect of one giant optical telescope so giving far higher resolution than single telescopes such as the hst which has a mirror of 2.4 m diameter. they have been used to measure the angular diameters of nearby stars, so that, given their distances as measured by the method of parallax, their diameters can be derived (figure 6.9). in 2002, the light from two 8.2-m telescopes of the very large telescope (vlt) array in chile was combined to form an interferometer with a baseline of 102.4 m. its resolution was thus equivalent to an optical telescope ∼100 m in diameter. it measured an angular diameter of proxima centauri, the nearest star to the earth, figure 6.9 an image of the double star capella made with the coast optical interferometer at the mullard radio astronomy observatory at cambridge.