in the same way that a convex lens can con- centrate the light from a distant object into the eye and so make it appear brighter, if a distant star passes behind one of intermediate distance, the brightness of the distant star will undergo a temporary increase which can last for many days. the peak brightness can be up to 10 times (2.5 magnitudes) that normally observed. more than a thousand such events had been observed by the end of 2007. if the lensing star has a planet in orbit around it, then that planet can produce its own microlensing event, and thus provide a way of detecting its presence. for this to be observed, a highly improbable alignment is required so that a very figure 4.7 an artist’s impression of the planet hd 209458b showing an extended envelope of carbon and oxygen and tail of evaporating hydrogen. image: esa and alfred vidal-madjar (institut d’astrophysique de paris, cnrs, france). [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page166_img1.jpeg] 146 introduction to astronomy and cosmology large number of distant stars must be continuously monitored in order to detect planetary microlensing events.
observations are usually performed using net- works of robotic telescopes (such as those forming the ogle collaboration) which continuously monitor millions of stars towards the centre of the galaxy in order to provide a large number of background stars. if one of the telescopes ﬁ nds that the brightness of a star is increasing, then the whole network, spaced around the world for continuous observation, will provide unbroken monitoring. the presence of a planet is shown by a very short additional brightening appearing as a spike on the ﬂ anks of the main brightness curve. on january 25, 2006, the discovery of ogle-2005-blg-390lb was announced (figure 4.8). this planet is estimated to have a mass of ∼5.5 earth masses and orbits a red dwarf star which is around 21500 light years from earth, towards the centre of the milky way galaxy (figure 4.9). the planet lies at a distance of 2.6 au from its sun. at the time of its discovery, this planet had the lowest mass of any known extra-solar planet orbiting a main sequence star.
this record may still hold unless the mass of gliese 581c, discovered in april 2007 by the radial velocity method, is found to have a mass very close to its minimum mass of 5 earth masses. by the end of 2007, four extra-solar planets had been discovered using the microlensing technique. a disadvantage of the method is that the chance alignment that allowed the lensing event that led to the planet’s detection is highly unlikely to be ever repeated. also, the detected planets will tend to be many thousands of light years figure 4.8 observations by the ogle consortium showing the microlensing caused by a planet of 5.5 earth masses. image: eso press release march 2006. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page167_img1.jpeg] extra-solar planets 147 away, so making any follow-up observations by other methods virtually impos- sible. however, if enough background stars can be observed over long periods of time the method should ﬁ nally enable us to estimate how common earth-like planets are in the galaxy.
in early 2008, the gravitational microlensing method detected two gas giant planets, similar to jupiter and saturn, orbiting a star 5000 light years away in a planetary system with striking similarities to our own solar system. the discov- ery suggests that giant planets do not live alone but are more likely to be found in family groups. the mass of the nearer planet is 0.71 times that of jupiter and it lies 2.3 times as far from its host star as the earth is from the sun. the second planet is less massive; 0.27 times the mass of jupiter, and twice as far away from the host star. despite their host star only being half as massive as the sun the planetary sys- tem otherwise bears a remarkable similarity to our solar system. both the ratio of the masses of the two giant planets (close to 3:1) and the ratio of their distances from the host star (1:2) are remarkably similar to those of jupiter and saturn. the ratio between the orbital periods of 5 years and 14 years, respectively, also closely resembles that between jupiter and saturn (2:5).