8.3.6 groups and clusters of galaxies most galaxies are found in groups typically containing a few tens of galaxies or clusters that may contain up to several thousand. our milky way galaxy forms part of the local group that contains around 40 galaxies within a volume of space 3 million light years across. our galaxy is one of the three spiral galaxies (along with m31 and m33) that dominate the group and contain the majority of its mass. m31, the andromeda galaxy, shown in figure 8.25, and our own are comparable in size and mass and their mutual gravitational attraction is bringing them towards each other so that, in a few billion years, they will merge to form an elliptical galaxy. m33, whose mass we calculated earlier, is the third largest galaxy in the group. the group also contains many dwarf elliptical galaxies, such as the two orbiting m31 and visible in figure 8.24.
m32 is a small, type e2, elliptical galaxy seen to the left of the nucleus of m31, just outside its spiral arms, whilst ngc 205 (m110) is a more elongated, type e5 or e6, elliptical that is seen to the lower left of the nucleus of m31. the local group contains several large irregular galaxies, such as the magellanic clouds, and at least 10 dwarf irregulars to add to the total. there may well be more galaxies within the group, hidden beyond the milky way that obscures over 20% of the heavens. the region lying in virgo just to the west of leo shows many hundreds of galaxies and is thus called ‘the realm of the galaxies’. sixteen of these are bright enough to have been catalogued by charles messier using a telescope with an aperture of just a few inches. in this direction we are looking towards the heart of a galaxy cluster containing some 2000 members called, due the constellation in which we observe it, the virgo cluster (figure 8.26). two other nearby clusters are the coma cluster and the hercules cluster.
galaxy clusters typically contain 50–1000 galaxies within diameters of 6–35 million light years and having total masses of 1014–1015 solar masses. 296 introduction to astronomy and cosmology figure 8.25 m31, the andromeda galaxy, along with two dwarf elliptical galaxies, m32 and ngc 205. image: adam block, noao/aura/nsf. figure 8.26 the virgo cluster of galaxies. image: space telescope science institute, nasa. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page317_img1.jpeg] [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page317_img2.jpeg] galaxies and the large scale structure of the universe 297 8.3.7 superclusters small clusters and groups of galaxies appear to make up structures on an even larger scale. they are known as superclusters and have overall sizes of order 300 million light years (100 times the scale size of our local group). usually a supercluster is dominated by one very rich cluster surrounded by a num- ber of smaller groups. the local supercluster is dominated by the virgo cluster.
the virgo supercluster, as it is often called, is in the form of a ﬂ attened ellipse about 150 million light years in extent with the virgo cluster at its centre and our local group near one end. in the same general direction but further away lies the coma cluster containing over 1000 galaxies. it is the dominant cluster in the coma supercluster at a distance of 330 million light years. two other nearby superclusters lie in the directions of the constellations perseus/pisces and hydra/ centaurus at distances of 150 and 230 million light years, respectively. these very great distances are beyond that where the cepheid variable distance scale can be used. in chapter 9 we will see how relatively recent obser- vations of type ia supernovae are being used to measure distances of this magnitude. however, it is worth mentioning a very simple method that had been used prior to this new technique. one could reasonably assume that the larg- est galaxies within a cluster are probably of the same size. one might take the third largest to avoid the possibility that the largest might be more extreme than in most clusters.