3.3.2 planetary densities from the angular size of a planet and its distance one can calculate the diameter of a planet and hence its volume so, given its mass, one can thus calculate its density. it is interesting to use saturn as an example. saturn is not a sphere, but an oblate spheroid having a greater equatorial than polar radius. we will use an ‘average’ value of ∼59 000 km for our calculation. its volume will thus be 4/3 " πr3: v ! 4/3 " 3.14159 " (5.9 " 107)3 m3 ! 7.76 " 1023 m3 given saturn’s mass of 5.7 " 1026 kg, this gives a density of ∼662 kg m#3, which is a little less than the accepted value of 687 kg m#3. you will note that this is less than that of water (1000 kg m#3 at 4°c)!
3.3.3 rotation periods for some planets, such as mars, jupiter and saturn, one can observe the rotation of a marking on the surface or in the atmosphere – such as the ‘red spot’ which lies in the atmosphere of jupiter. the surface of mercury is very indistinct as seen from earth and venus is cloud covered! in these two cases, planetary radars have been able to measure the rota- tion periods. imagine the point at which venus lies exactly between the earth and our solar system 2 – the planets 81 the sun and a continuous radio frequency is reﬂ ected from venus when a radar transmitter lies on the line between the centre of the earth, through the centre of venus to the centre of the sun. at this time (and this time only) the motion of venus will be across the line of sight and there will be no doppler shift in the returned echo.
(to be totally accurate, there will be a very small doppler shift called the transverse doppler shift due to a prediction of special relativity.) the centre frequency of the returned echo will be at precisely the same fre- quency as that transmitted and, if venus is not rotating, all the returned energy will be at this frequency. suppose, however, venus is rotating. one limb will be coming towards us relative to the centre, whilst the other will be moving away from us. the echoes from the limbs will thus be doppler shifted above and below the centre frequency so that the returned echo is ‘broadened’ in frequency. the greater the broadening, the greater the rotation rate of the planet. radar observations made in the 1960s showed that venus had a very slow rota- tion rate, taking 243.01 days to rotate once round its axis – 18.3 days longer that it takes to orbit the sun! even more surprising, it rotates in the opposite direction to that expected. looking down from above the solar system all the planets rotate in an anticlockwise direction.
the spin of most planets is also in an anticlockwise direction, but venus (along with uranus and pluto) rotates in a clockwise direction, in the opposite sense to its orbital motion, and the rotation is said to be retrograde. 3.3.4 planetary temperatures there are three ways that we can measure or estimate the surface temperature of a planet: (1) in the case of venus and mars, spacecraft on the surface have made direct measurements. (2) the temperature of mercury was estimated from the intensity of its radio emission assuming it to act as a black body. in a similar way, the tempera- tures of the outer planets can be estimated from their infrared emission. (3) we can calculate a nominal temperature on the assumption that a planet acts like a black body and will radiate away the energy that it receives from the sun. (there must be an equilibrium between the energy absorbed from the sun and that emitted by a planet.) we will consider this last method in more detail and carry out a calculation to derive the surface temperature of the earth. we know that, above the atmosphere, 1368 w of solar energy (the solar constant) fall on the earth per square metre.