extreme ultraviolet observatories astronomers have been somewhat reluctant to build space telescopes to observe at extreme short ultraviolet wavelengths since theories suggests that the interstel- lar medium (the tiny traces of gases and dust between the stars) would absorb much of this radiation in this part of the spectrum. however, when the extreme ultraviolet explorer (euve) was launched, observations showed that the region around the sun is relatively sparse of gas and dust – it appears to be located within a bubble in the local interstellar medium – and this enabled the euve instruments to see much further than expected. 196 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the ultraviolet/x-ray boundary an array of low energy x-ray imaging sensors (alexis) was launched in 1995. though its name implies that it is an x-ray observatory, the range of wavelengths observed by alexis is at the very lowest end of the x-ray spectrum and often considered to be extreme ultraviolet. x-rays – the chandra x-ray observatory nasa’s x-ray observatory is named in honour of subrahmanyan chandrasekhar who, at the age of 19, determined the mass limit for white dwarf stars.
it was launched and deployed by the space shuttle columbia in 1999 for a nominal 5-year mission. mirrors cannot be used to focus x-ray radiation as x-ray photons would be absorbed by normal mirror surfaces. instead x-ray telescopes use nested cylindrical paraboloid and hyperboloid surfaces coated with iridium or gold, deployed so that the x-rays are incident at very low grazing angles. (an analogy is the fact that a water surface reﬂ ects light well when it falls on it at a very shallow angle.) chandra uses four pairs of nested iridium mirrors to give a resolution of 0.5 arcsec. chandra observations have revolutionized the ﬁ eld of x-ray astronomy: the image of the supernova remnant cassiopeia a, gave a ﬁ rst glimpse of the compact object at its centre, probably a neutron star or black hole (figure 5.31). x-ray figure 5.31 the chandra x-ray observatory with inset showing the x-ray image of cassiopeia a. image: chandra, nasa.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page217_img1.jpeg] observing the universe 197 emission has been seen from the region surrounding the super-massive black hole, sagittarius a*, at the centre of the milky way and chandra has made a measurement of hubble’s constant giving a value of 76.9 km s!1 mpc!1. recently, chandra’s observation of colliding superclusters has found strong evidence for the existence of dark matter. gamma rays – the compton gamma-ray observatory the compton gamma-ray observatory, named after dr arthur holly compton, a nobel prize winner for work involved with gamma-ray physics, was launched in april 1991 and was deployed in low earth orbit at 450 km in order to avoid the van allen radiation belt. it carried a complement of four instruments to cover gamma-ray energies from 20 kev to 30 gev. a key use of the telescope was the detection of transient events, called gamma-ray bursts (grbs). it detected, on average, 1 grb per day with a total of 2700 detections.
a grb observed in 1999, one of the brightest bursts recorded, was the ﬁ rst grb with an optical afterglow that allowed astronomers to measure a redshift of 1.6 for the object giving rise to the gamma rays which corresponds to a distance of 4.5 gpc. it appears that grbs result when a massive star explodes in what is called a hypernova or perhaps when two neutron stars coalesce. following the failure of one of its control gyroscopes, the observatory was deliberately brought out of orbit and its debris fell into the paciﬁ c ocean in june 2000. 5.14 observing the universe without using electromagnetic radiation cosmic rays and gravitational waves can provide a way to learn about the universe in other ways than by observing electromagnetic radiation. 5.14.1 cosmic rays cosmic rays are energetic particles that enter the earth’s atmosphere from space. protons make up nearly 90% of all incoming cosmic ray particles with about 9% helium nuclei (alpha particles) and about 1% electrons along with a small compo- nent of more massive nuclei. the particles arrive individually, not in a beam, so the term ‘ray’ is a misnomer.