all stars in the pleiades cluster lie on the main sequence – even the brightest, alcyone, which is 1000 times more luminous than our sun. as we have seen, such stars have relatively short lifetimes on the main sequence, and stellar evolution stud- ies indicate that the pleiades cluster cannot be more than ∼115 million years old. in contrast, the h–r diagram for the beehive cluster shows that the stars that would have been at the upper left of the main sequence have evolved off it; ﬁ ve of which are now red giants in the upper right of the diagram and some, not shown, have reached the end of their lives as white dwarfs. its age is believed to be ∼750 million years. 8.1.2 globular clusters the globular clusters are, in contrast, very old stars in tight spherical concen- trations (∼200 light years across) of 20 000–1 million stars. in the northern hemisphere the most spectacular is m13 in hercules (figure 8.4), whilst omega centauri is a jewel of the southern hemisphere.
they date from the origin of the galaxy and were formed in the initial star formation period of our galaxy but figure 8.3 hertzsprung–russell diagrams of two open clusters. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page288_img1.jpeg] 268 introduction to astronomy and cosmology their precise origin and role in the evolution of the galaxy is still unclear. globular clusters orbit the centre of our galaxy and form a roughly spherical distribution helping to form what is known as the galactic halo. we know of 150 globular clusters associated with our galaxy and perhaps a further 20 may be present but obscured by dust. their spherical shape is due to the fact that they are very tightly bound by gravity, a further consequence of which is that the stars near their centres are very tightly packed. 8.1.3 the interstellar medium and emission nebulae together the gas and dust make up what is called the interstellar medium (ism). most of the ism is not apparent to our eyes but in some regions we can see either ‘emission nebulae’ where the gas glows or ‘dark nebulae’ where a dust cloud appears in silhouette against a bright region of the galaxy.
perhaps the most spec- tacular example of an emission nebula is the great nebula in orion, or more sim- ply the orion nebula – a region of star formation where the hydrogen gas is being excited by the ultraviolet light emitted by the very hot young stars (forming the ‘trapezium’) at its heart (figure 8.5). this type of emission nebula is called an hii (‘h-two’) region as it contains ionized hydrogen where the electrons have been split off from the protons by the ultraviolet photons emitted by very hot stars. figure 8.4 m13, the globular cluster in hercules. image: robert j. vanderbei, wikipedia commons. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page289_img1.jpeg] galaxies and the large scale structure of the universe 269 the protons and electrons can then recombine to form neutral hydrogen atoms (hi or ‘h-one’) and the electrons drop through the allowed energy levels to the lowest energy state emitting photons of various wavelengths as they do so. one of these transitions gives rise to a bright red emission line at 6563 å, so in photo- graphs these regions look a pinky-red colour.
an example of a dark nebula is the ‘coal sack’, seen against the background of the milky way close to the southern cross. often the two types are seen together, as in the eagle nebula in serpens and the horsehead nebula in orion, where the dark pillars of dust and the ‘horse’s head’, respectively, are seen against the bright glow of excited gas clouds (figure 8.6). 8.1.4 size, shape and structure of the milky way the size of the galaxy was ﬁ rst measured by harlow shapley who measured the distances to 100 of the globular clusters associated with our galaxy. he found that they formed a spherical distribution, whose centre should logically be the figure 8.5 the orion nebula, m42. image: nasa, esa, m. robberto (stsci/esa) and the hubble space telescope orion treasury project team.