however, in the cases of galaxies beyond our local group there is a far better way of thinking about the cause of the redshifts that are observed by us. it is not right to think of the galaxies (beyond the move- ments of those in our local group) moving through space but, rather, that they are being carried apart by the expansion of space. a nice analogy is that of baking a currant bun. the dough is packed with currants and then baked. when taken out of the oven the bun will (hopefully) be bigger and thus the currants will be further apart. they will not have moved through the dough, but will have been carried apart by the expansion of the dough. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page328_img1.png] 308 introduction to astronomy and cosmology as hubble showed, the universe is expanding so that it would have been smaller in the past. when a photon was emitted in a distant galaxy correspond- ing to a speciﬁ c spectral line, the universe would have been smaller.
in the time it has taken that photon to reach us whilst the photon has travelled through space, the universe has expanded and this expansion has stretched, by exactly the same ratio, the wavelength of the photon. this increases the wavelength so giving rise to a redshift that we call the ‘cosmological redshift’. a simple analogy is that of drawing a sine wave (representing the wavelength of a photon) onto a slightly blown up balloon. if the balloon is then blown up further, the length between the peaks of the sine wave (its wavelength) will increase. this gives a very nice interpretation of the parameter z. if we ﬁ nd that a galaxy is observed at a redshift of z, then, by adding 1 to that value we can ﬁ nd the ratio of the wavelengths of the photons observed to those emitted. this simply means that we ‘see’ the galaxy at a time when the universe was smaller by just this ratio, (1 ! z). for example, if we observe a quasar whose redshift is 6.4 (the highest quasar redshift known at the time of writing), then 1 !
z " 7.4, which means that we see the quasar at a time when the universe was 7.4 times smaller than it is now. for small redshifts, the apparent velocity of recession is given by the simple formula: v " zc as an example, consider the object 3c273, the ﬁ rst quasar that was discovered. its measured redshift was 0.158 – a 16% shift in wavelength. this implies that it is moving away from us at a speed given by zc " 0.158 # 3 # 105 km s$1 " ∼47 000 km s$1. the distance can then be found from hubble’s law and is given by d " v/h0 " 47 000/72 mpc. this is ∼650 mpc corresponding to ∼2100 million light years – about 1000 times further away than the andromeda galaxy. however, at high redshifts, such as that of the quasar referred to above with a redshift of 6.4, the simple formula v " cz no longer applies and a more complex analysis must be used.
9.5 the steady state model of the universe as a result of the ‘age’ problem many astronomers did not give much credence to the big bang models and in 1948, herman bondi, thomas gold and fred hoyle (who disliked the idea of an instantaneous origin of the universe) proposed an alternative theory called the steady state theory. all cosmological theories cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 309 embrace what is called the cosmological principle that is, on the large scale at any given time, the view of the universe from any location within it will be the same. bondi, gold and hoyle extended this principle to give what they called the perfect cosmological principle where the words ‘at any given time’ were replaced by ‘for all time’. their universe was unchanging on the large scale. that did not mean that it was not expanding. at the heart of their theory was the idea that, as the galaxies moved further apart due to the expansion of the universe, new matter, in the form of hydrogen, was created in the space between them which eventually formed new galaxies to keep the observed density of galaxies constant.