image: jocelyn bell and tony hewish, university of cambridge. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page274_img1.jpeg] 254 introduction to astronomy and cosmology discovered she was somewhat relieved as ‘it was highly unlikely that two lots of little green men could choose the same unusual frequency and unlikely tech- nique to send a signal to the same inconspicuous planet earth!’ a few days before the paper presenting these discoveries was published in nature in february 1968, hewish announced the discovery to a group of astrono- mers at cambridge. fred hoyle was amongst them, and suggested that the signal might be pulsed emissions coming from an oscillating neutron star – the theo- retical remnant of a supernova but never previously observed. after a press con- ference following the publication of the nature paper announcing the discovery, the science correspondent of the daily telegraph coined the name pulsar for these enigmatic objects. some 3 months later, in a paper also published in nature, thomas gold at cornell university in ithaca, usa, gave an explanation for the pulsed signals.
gold suggested that the radio signals were indeed coming from neutron stars, but that the neutron star was not oscillating, but instead spinning rapidly around its axis. he surmised that the rotation, coupled with the expected intense magnetic ﬁ eld generates two steady beams of radio waves along the axis of the magnetic ﬁ eld lines, one beam above the north magnetic pole and one above the south mag- netic pole. if (as in the case of the earth) the magnetic ﬁ eld axis is not aligned with the neutron star’s rotation axis, these two beans would sweep around the sky rather like the beam from a lighthouse (figure 7.13). if then, by chance, one of the two beams crossed our location in space, our radio telescopes would detect a sequence of regular pulses – just as bell had observed – whose period was simply the rotation rate of the neutron star. figure 7.13 twin beams emitted by a pulsar. image: michael kramer, university of manchester.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page275_img1.jpeg] stellar evolution – the life and death of stars 255 gold, in this paper, pointed out that a neutron star (due to the conservation of angular momentum when it was formed) could easily be spinning at such rates. he expected that most pulsars should be spinning even faster than the ﬁ rst two observed by jocelyn bell and suggested a maximum rate of around 100 pulses per second. since then, nearly 2000 pulsars have been discovered. the majority have peri- ods between 0.25 s and 2 s. it is thought that as the pulsar rotation rate slows the emission mechanism breaks down and the slowest pulsar detected has a period of 4.308 s. there is a class of ‘millisecond’ pulsars where the proximity of a compan- ion star has enabled the neutron star to ‘pull’ material from the outer envelope of the adjacent star onto itself. this also transfers angular momentum so spinning the pulsar up to give periods in the millisecond range – hence their name.
the fastest known pulsar is spinning at just over 700 times per second – with a point on its equator moving at 20% of the speed of light and close to the point where it is thought theoretically that the neutron star would break up! pulsars slowly radiate energy, which is derived from their angular momentum. this is so high that the rate of slowdown is exceptionally slow and consequently pulsars make highly accurate clocks and some may even be able to challenge the accuracy of the best atomic clocks. the periods of all pulsars slowly increase (except when being spun up to form a millisecond pulsar) and a typical pulsar would have a lifetime of a few tens of millions of years. the linking of pulsars with supernova neutron star remnants was conﬁ rmed when the ‘odd’ star close to the centre of the crab nebula was shown to be a pul- sar with a period of 0.0333 s – rotating just over 30 times per second. a second pulsar was discovered within the vela supernova remnant and both this and the crab pulsar also emit beams of radiation not just at radio waves, but across the whole electromagnetic spectrum including visible light, x-rays and gamma rays.