by measuring the doppler shift in this spectral line rubin was able to plot their velocities around the galactic centre as a function of their distance from it. she had expected that clouds that were more distant from the centre of the galaxy (where much of its mass was expected to be concen- trated) would rotate at lower speeds – just as the outer planets travel more slowly around the sun. this is known as keplerian motion, with the rotational speed decreasing inversely as the square root of the distance from the centre. (this is enshrined in kepler’s third law of planetary motion and can be derived from newton’s law of gravity.) figure 8.16 m81 in ursa major. image: nasa, esa, and the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura). [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page300_img1.jpeg] 280 introduction to astronomy and cosmology to her great surprise, rubin found that the rotational speeds of the clouds did not decrease with increasing distance from the galactic centre and, in some cases, even increased somewhat.
not all the mass of the galaxy is located in the centre but the rotational speed would still be expected to decrease with increasing radius beyond the inner regions of the galaxy although the decrease would not be as rapid as if all the mass were located in the centre. to give an example; the rota- tion speed of our own sun around the centre of the milky way galaxy would be expected to be ∼160 km s!1. it is, in fact, ∼220 km s!1. the only way these results can be explained is that either the stars in the galaxy are embedded in a large halo of unseen matter – extending well beyond the visible galaxy – or that newton’s law of gravity does not hold true for large distances. the unseen matter, whose gravitational effects rubin’s observations had discovered, is called ‘dark matter’. further evidence, some dating from the 1930s and some very recent, for the exis- tence of dark matter will be given below. a more detailed discussion will be given in chapter 9.
a modiﬁ ed form of newton’s law called mond (modiﬁ ed newtonian dynamics) was proposed by mordechai milgrom in 1981, who pointed out that newton’s second law (f " ma) when applied to gravitational forces has only been veriﬁ ed when the gravitational acceleration is large and has never been veriﬁ ed where the acceleration, a, is extremely small – as would be the case for stars towards the edge of a galaxy where the gravitational forces are very weak. with a suitable choice of parameters the observed rotation curves of galaxies can be accurately modelled by the mond theory (figure 8.17); however, it has a much harder task explaining other observations that support the existence of dark matter, such as the dynamics of galaxy clusters and gravitational lensing, so mond will not be considered further. 8.2.4 weighing a galaxy the observations of the hydrogen line described above can be used to calculate the mass of a galaxy. figure 8.18 shows the hydrogen line spectrum of the nearby galaxy m33 which lies at a distance of 2.36 # 1022 m (∼2.9 million light years).
the horizontal axis of figure 8.18 has been converted from frequency to veloc- ity using the doppler formula: ∆f/f " v/c. the hydrogen line spectrum of m33 has a width in frequency due to the fact that it is rotating – one side of the galaxy is coming towards us whilst the other is moving away. the centre of the m33 hydrogen emission corresponds to a velocity of !180 km s!1. you might well deduce that the galaxy as a whole is moving away from us at this speed but, as all but a few galaxies are moving away from us, the sign convention that is used is that galaxies moving away from us are given positive velocities and those moving galaxies and the large scale structure of the universe 281 towards us are given negative velocities. so this indicates that m33 is moving towards us at a speed of ∼180 km s!1. however, our solar system is moving around the centre of the galaxy at a speed of ∼220 km s!1 and, having corrected for this, m33 is actually moving towards the milky way galaxy at a speed of ∼24 km s!1.