a neutron star with a radius of 10 km is observed to rotate 712 times per second. at what speed, relative to that of light, is the surface of the neu- tron star’s equator moving? 6. the schwarzschild radius, rs, of a black hole is given by 2gm/c2. calculate rs for a stellar remnant of 10 solar masses which has become a black hole. galaxies and the large scale structure of the universe 8.1 the milky way on a dark night with transparent skies, we can see a band of light across the sky that we call the milky way. (this comes from the latin via lactea.) the light comes from the myriads of stars packed so closely together that our eyes fail to resolve them into individual points of light. this is our view of our own galaxy, called the milky way galaxy or often ‘the galaxy’ for short. it shows considerable structure due to obscuration by intervening dust clouds. the band of light is not uniform; the brightness and extent is greatest towards the constellation sagittarius sug- gesting that in that direction we are looking towards the galactic centre.
however, due to the dust, we are only able to see about one-tenth of the way towards it. in the opposite direction in the sky the milky way is less apparent implying that we live out towards one side. finally, the fact that we see a band of light tells us that the stars, gas and dust that make up the galaxy are in the form of a ﬂ at disc. figure 8.1 is the best all-sky image of our galaxy ever taken, and the author is indebted to axel mellinger for allowing it to be used in this book. it is a composite from images taken from dark sky sites around the world and covers the night sky in the same way that a map can show the whole of the earth’s globe. across the image is the sweep of the milky way, with the centre of the galaxy, lying in the constellation sagittarius, showing as a bulge in the exact centre of the image. below and to the right of the centre are seen two nearby galaxies, the large and small magellanic clouds. the constellation orion is at the right just below the path of the milky way.
the andromeda galaxy can just be seen as a thin streak below the milky way two-thirds of the way to the left of the image from the centre. the major visible constituent of the galaxy, about 96%, is made up of stars, with the remaining 4% split between gas (∼3%) and dust (∼1%) (figure 8.2). here ‘visible’ means that detection can be done by electromagnetic radiation; visible, infrared or radio. as we shall see later, we suspect that there is a further compo- nent of the galaxy that we cannot detect (called ‘dark matter’). chapter 8 introduction to astronomy and cosmology ian morison © 2008 john wiley & sons, ltd 266 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 8.1.1 open star clusters amongst the general star background we can see close groupings of stars that are called clusters. these are of two types; open clusters and globular clusters. open clusters are a consequence of the formation of a group of stars in a giant cloud of dust and gas and are thus naturally found along the plane of the milky way – the disc of our galaxy.
over time the stars will tend to drift apart but, whilst they are young, we will see the stars relatively closely packed together. prime examples observable in the northern hemisphere are the hyades and pleiades clusters in taurus and the double cluster in perseus. (the pleiades cluster is shown in figure 2.1.) one can get an indication of the age of a cluster by plotting a hertzsprung– russell diagram (h–r diagram) of the stars in the cluster. figure 8.3 shows the figure 8.1 all-sky image of the milky way. image: axel mellinger. figure 8.2 cross-section of our galaxy. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page287_img1.jpeg] [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page287_img2.jpeg] galaxies and the large scale structure of the universe 267 h–r diagrams of the pleiades cluster, m45, and the beehive cluster (or praesepe, latin for ‘manger’), m44.