in the clos- est galaxies the lines were shifted toward the blue end of the spectrum, but for galaxies beyond our local group, the lines were shifted towards the red. this effect is called a redshift or blueshift and the simple explanation attributes this effect to the speed of approach or recession of the galaxy, similar to the falling pitch of a receding train whistle, which we know of as the doppler effect (figure 9.3). for speeds which are small compared with the speed of light, then the following simple formula may be used: figure 9.3 the redshift in the spectral lines from a distant galaxy (below) relative to those observed in our sun (above). image: wikipedia commons. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page324_img1.jpeg] 304 introduction to astronomy and cosmology ∆f/f ! ∆λ/λ ! v/c where f is the frequency, λ is the wavelength, ∆f and ∆λ are changes in frequency and wavelength, v is the velocity of approach or recession and c is the speed of light. some of the earliest observations of redshifts and blueshifts were made by the american astronomer vesto slipher.
in 1913 he discovered that the andromeda galaxy had a blueshift of 300 km s"1. this implies that the andromeda and the milky way galaxies are approaching each other due to the gravitational attraction between them but not, as might ﬁ rst appear, at 300 km s"1. our sun is orbiting the centre of our galaxy at about 220 km s"1 and taking this into account, the actual approach speed is nearer 100 km s"1. by 1915 slipher had measured the shifts for 15 galaxies, 11 of which were redshifted. two years later, a further six redshifts had been measured and it became obvious that only the nearer galaxies (those within our local group) showed blueshifts. from the measured shifts and, using the doppler formula given above, he was able to calculate the velocities of approach or recession of these galaxies. these data were used by edwin hubble in what was perhaps the greatest observational discovery of the last century, and it is perhaps a little unfair that slipher has not been given more recognition. 9.4 the expansion of the universe in the late 1920s, edwin hubble, using the 100 in.
hooker telescope on mount wilson, measured the distances of galaxies in which he could observe a type of very bright variable stars, called cepheid variables, which vary in brightness with very regular periods. (the method was described in chapter 8.) he combined these measurements with those of their speed of approach or recession (provided by slipher) of their host galaxies (measured from the blue or red shifts in their spectral lines) to produce a plot of speed against distance (figure 9.4). all, except the closest galaxies, were receding from us and he found that the greater the dis- tance, the greater the apparent speed of recession. from this he derived hubble’s law in which the speed of recession and distance were directly proportional and related by hubble’s constant (h0). the value that is derived from his original data was ∼500 km s"1 mpc"1. such a linear relationship is a direct result of observing a universe that is expanding uniformly, so hubble had shown that we live within an expanding universe. the use of the word ‘constant’ is perhaps misleading. it would only be a real constant if the universe expanded linearly throughout the whole of its existence.
it has not – which is why the subscript is used. h0 is the current value of hubble’s constant! cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 305 consider the very simple one-dimensional universe shown in figure 9.5. initially the three components are 10 miles apart. let this universe expand uniformly by a factor of two in 1 h. as seen from the left-hand component, the middle components will have appeared to have moved 10 miles in 1 h whilst the right-hand component will have appeared to move 20 miles – the apparent recession velocity is proportional to the distance. if one makes the simple assumption that the universe has expanded at a uniform rate throughout its existence, then it is possible to backtrack in time until the universe would have had no size – its origin – and hence estimate the age, known as the hubble age, of the universe.