(2) for a period, the protostar remains at ∼10 times the luminosity of the resulting star. the star is getting smaller, which reduces the surface area but, at the same time, the surface temperature is rising so increasing the emission per unit area. the two effects roughly cancel, so the protostar remains at a roughly constant luminosity. (3) as the star drops onto the main sequence, it goes through a very violent stage when approximately half its mass is lost. it is called the tau tauri phase in the life of the star. (tau tauri is a triple star system in taurus where the primary star is dropping onto the main sequence.) (4) the star settles on the main sequence burning hydrogen into helium. as the amount of helium in the core increases, its temperature rises and the star becomes somewhat hotter and so moves upward and to the left of the h–r diagram. figure 7.6 the evolutionary track of a 1 solar mass star on the h–r diagram.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page263_img1.jpeg] stellar evolution – the life and death of stars 243 (5) the star becomes a red giant as it burns helium to carbon. (6) it then burns carbon into oxygen within the core and becomes unstable, changing in luminosity and colour as it does so. (7) finally, when no more energy can be extracted from the core, the star blows off its outer envelope, giving rise to a planetary nebula. (8) the cooling ember of the core, collapsed down to about the size of the earth, drops to the lower left of the h–r diagram and becomes a white dwarf. it is on the left of the diagram as it will still be very hot but, as it is very small, it will not be very luminous so lies at the bottom of the diagram. 7.7 evolution in close binary systems – the algol paradox for much of their life, stars in close binary systems evolve just as described above, but as one or other of the stars ends its main sequence life things get a little strange. consider algol, the demon star, which was discussed in chapter 6 as an eclipsing binary system.
it consists of a 3.7 solar mass main sequence star in close orbit with a 0.8 solar mass sub-giant star. this is odd. both stars were presum- ably born at the same time so we would expect the more massive star to leave the main sequence ﬁ rst, as more massive stars burn up their fuel more rapidly. this paradox is resolved by the phenomenon of mass transfer between the two stars. the higher mass star of the original binary pair did, indeed, evolve more rapidly, but as it expanded to form a red giant, the outer parts of its envelope began to spill onto its less massive companion as the gas succumbed to its gravitational pull. it thus increases its mass at the expense of the giant star. the sub-giant in the algol system was originally the more massive of the two stars but has lost a lot of mass to its companion. the future of this system is equally interesting. as the main sequence star accretes more mass, its internal pressure, and hence temperature, will have to increase so increasing its core hydrogen fusion rate. when, in the future, it exhausts the hydrogen in its core it too will expand into a red giant.
as you might guess, at this point it will then begin to transfer mass back to the 0.8 solar mass star – a stellar see-saw! 7.8 high mass stars in the range >8 solar masses stars in this mass range have sufﬁ cient mass overlying the core so that the tem- perature of the core can increase beyond that in less massive stars. this allows the capture of alpha particles to proceed further. having made carbon and oxygen, 244 introduction to astronomy and cosmology it is then possible to build up the heavier elements having atomic numbers increasing by four – produced by the absorption of alpha particles. hence, the 16o fuses to 20ne, the 20ne fuses to 24mg and then 24mg fuses to 28si producing a core dominated by silicon. for each successive reaction to take place the temperature has to increase as there is a greater potential barrier for the incoming alpha particle to tunnel through. in the melee, protons can react with these elements to form nuclei of other atoms with intermediate atomic numbers, such as 19fl and 23na, though these will be less common.