1024 kg radius (mean) 6371 km escape velocity 11.18 km s"1 day length 1 day rotation period 23 h 56 min 04 s (sidereal day) axial tilt 23.44° semi-major axis of orbit 149 597 887.5 km 1 au average orbital speed 29.78 km s"1 eccentricity 0.0167 period 365.256366 days orbital inclination 0° (our orbit provides the reference plane.) the earth–moon system was formed when an object, thought to have had a mass of about 10% that of the earth, impacted with it soon after the formation of the solar system (figure 3.8). a portion of the combined mass was thrown off into space and formed the moon, initially far closer to the earth than now. as the our solar system 2 – the planets 93 moon’s relative mass and size is comparable with that of the earth the two are sometimes thought of as a ‘double planet’. the name earth derives from the anglo-saxon word ‘erda’ meaning ground or soil. this became ‘eorthe’ in old english and then ‘erthe’ in middle english.
finally, from around 1400, the name earth was used – the only planetary name not derived from greek and roman mythology. out-gassing from volcanoes produced its secondary atmosphere and water vapour condensed to form the oceans, with additional water provided by the impact of comets. about 4 billion years ago a self-replicating molecular system – life – arose. photosynthesis allowed the trapping of solar energy and the by-product, oxygen, accumulated in the atmosphere. a resulting layer of ozone reduced the ﬂ ux of ultraviolet radiation on the surface which allowed life forms to survive on land. the surface of the earth has been shaped by plate tectonics – the movement of sections of the crust across the underlying magma – which at times formed vast continents such as pangaea which allowed species to colonize much of the surface. in the cambrian era, which followed a period of extreme cold when much of the earth was covered in ice, multicellular life forms began to ﬂ ourish. in the ∼535 million years since then, there have been ﬁ ve ‘mass extinctions’ when many species died out.
the last of these was 65 million years ago when a large asteroid or comet of at least 10 km in diameter formed the chicxulub crater on (and offshore of) the yucatan peninsular in mexico. the dust produced would have reduced the amount of sunlight reaching the ground and hence the growth of vegetation. this may have been one of the causes of the demise of the dinosaurs at about this time along with ∼70% of all species then living on the earth. shrew-like small mammals were spared and their evolution ﬁ nally gave rise to human beings. figure 3.8 earthrise as seen by the apollo 8 crew as they rounded the moon’s far side in december 1968. image: nasa apollo 8 crew. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page114_img1.jpeg] 94 introduction to astronomy and cosmology our earth is a rocky body with a core, mantle and crust. its rotation causes a bulge at the equator whose diameter is 43 km greater than the polar diameter. as a result, the peak of mount chimborazo in equador lies furthest from the earth’s centre.
with an extreme variation from 8.8 km above (mount everest) to 10.9 km below (the mariana trench), the surface of the earth is actually smoother than a billiard ball! the central core has a temperature of ∼7000 k as a result of the decay of radio- active isotopes of potassium, uranium and thorium, all of which have half-lives of over 1 billion years. convection currents within the molten rock brought this heat up towards the crust giving rise to thermal hotspots and produced the volcanic activity which gave the earth its secondary atmosphere. the atmosphere is now largely composed of nitrogen (78%) and oxygen (21%) with the remaining 1% made up of water vapour, carbon dioxide, ozone, methane and other trace gases. it is worth pointing out again that without the warming due to the greenhouse gases, carbon dioxide, water vapour and methane, the average surface tempera- ture would be about !18°c and life would almost certainly not exist. ancient peoples put the earth at the centre of the universe and regarded the human race as special. as it was found that our sun is one of billions of stars in our galaxy, a principle of mediocrity arose.