it can thus only be observed during a total eclipse of the sun, or by using a special type of telescope, called a coronagraph, that can block out the light from the solar disc. how the corona can reach such high temperatures is still somewhat of a mystery, but it is thought that energy might be transported into it by magnetic ﬁ elds. the million degree temperatures give rise to x-ray emission that may be observed from space. figure 2.9 the solar corona at a time close to solar minimum. image: fred espernak. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page81_img1.jpeg] our solar system 1 – the sun 61 2.5.1 coronium the spectrum of the corona – the coronal spectrum – contains emission lines. when the emission lines observed in the solar corona during a solar eclipse were correlated with emission lines from known elements on earth, a green emission line was found that had no match. it was thought to relate to an unknown element and, as it had ﬁ rst been observed in the solar corona, it was provisionally named coronium.
however, in the 1930s, walter grotrian and bengt edlén, discovered that this spectral line was due to highly ionized iron – its high level of ioniza- tion being due to the extreme temperature of the solar corona. the resulting, very high energy, photons strip the outer electrons from atoms so giving them a positive charge. these are called ions. 2.6 the solar wind the sun is continuously ‘boiling off’ material in what is called the solar wind. its existence was deduced from observations of the tails of comets. a comet usually has two tails; the most obvious is the dust tail which is composed of grains of material that are released as the sun sublimates ice (turning it directly from a solid to a gas) from the surface of the comet nucleus and releases grains of dust embedded within it. the dust particles feel radiation pressure from the sun and are pushed away from the sun forming a tail which is usually curved, tending to lie along the comets’ elliptical orbit. there is also an ion tail composed of ionized molecules such as cyanogen, (cn)2, and carbon monoxide, co, which gives them a bluish colour as electrons recombine.
the ion tail is very straight, but cannot be explained by radiation pressure as the interaction is not sufﬁ cient. it could, how- ever, be explained if the sun was emitting a stream of charged particles, thought to be high energy electrons and protons, which would interact with the ions, transferring momentum to them and driving them away from the sun. satellites can measure the density and velocity of the solar wind at the location of the earth. there are about 7 000 000 ions, mostly protons and electrons but with some heavier ions, per cubic metre and these are moving at speeds of 200–700 km s!1. in the same way that one could calculate the total energy output of the sun, it is possible to estimate the total mass ﬂ ow away from the sun if one assumes that the mass loss is uniform in all directions. using a mid value for velocity of 500 km s!1, it appears that the sun is losing about 3 " 10!14 of its mass per year.
as a proton weighs ∼1 amu, which is ∼1.7 " 10!27 kg, the mass passing through 1 m2 s!1 is given approximately by: 1.7 " 10!27 " 7 " 106 " 5 " 105 # 6 " 10!15 kg 62 introduction to astronomy and cosmology as the surface area of a sphere with the radius of the earth about the sun is 4π(1.5 ! 1011)2 the approximate mass loss per year is: 6 ! 10"15 kg ! 4π(1.5 ! 1011)2 ! 86 400 ! 365 # ∼5 ! 1016 kg as the sun has a total mass of ∼2 ! 1030 kg it would lose all its mass in ∼1013 years, but this is a thousand times longer than the predicted lifetime of 1010 years so has minimal effect on the evolution of the sun. the interaction of the solar wind with the earth’s atmosphere will be described later.