near the top of the image and close to the terminator (the line between the bright and dark sides of the moon) is mons piton. this area is shown in greater detail on the right. piton’s shadow can be seen on the surface of the moon. the length of the shadow is determined by the height of the mountain and the elevation of the sun and so one can use this image to calculate the height of mons piton. to simplify the calculation we will assume that the sun is at inﬁ nite distance and above the moon’s equator (which runs across the face of the moon at right angles to the terminator). mons piton lies at a lunar latitude of !41°. first, we need to calculate the radius of the circle of constant latitude round the surface of the moon at !41°. this is a function of the lunar radius of 1738 km and the latitude of piton. figure 3.9 the moon seen at the time of total eclipse. image: ian morison.
(continued) [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page118_img1.jpeg] 98 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the radius of the circle of latitude at 41° north is given by rmoon ! cos (41°) and thus equals 1311.7 km. imagine slicing off the top of the moon at the latitude of piton and looking down on it from above as shown in figure 3.11. the lunar ‘prime meridian’ runs between piton and the crater cassini whose centre is on the terminator. piton lies 1° west and cassini 4.6° east of the prime figure 3.10 the third quarter moon and the region around mons piton. image: ian morison. figure 3.11 the geometry of the mons piton height calculation. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page119_img1.jpeg] [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page119_img2.png] our solar system 2 – the planets 99 meridian. the angle subtended by the separation of piton and cassini at the centre of this circle is thus 4.6° !
1° " 5.6°. from the radius calculated above it is possible, using the geometry of figure 3.11, to calculate the height that piton would have in order to produce a shadow that just reached the terminator. the height h of a mountain located at the site of piton whose shadow would just reach the terminator is given by l – r r/l " cos 5.6° so l " r/cos 5.6 " 1311.7/0.9952 " 1318.0 thus h " l – r " 1317.1 # 1311.7 " 6.3 km piton obviously has a lesser height than this and, from the lunar image, it is possible to estimate its height from the ratio of the length of its shadow to the distance from the mountain to the terminator. from an image such as that to the right of figure 3.11 we can measure the length of the piton’s shadow (l1) and the distance of piton from the terminator (l2). using a large scale image, l1was mea- sured to be ∼12 mm and l2∼33 mm.
thus an estimate of the height of mons piton is given by: 6.3 $ 12/33 " 2.29 km this estimate is close to the actual value of 2.25 km. tides tides in the oceans are the result of the inverse square law of gravity and the size of the earth. the gravitational force on the nearest side of the earth to the moon is thus greater than at the mid point and even more so than that at the far side. this causes a differential gravitational effect called a tidal force whose effects fall off as the fourth power of the distance. the result is to stretch out the earth’s oceans into an ellipse so that the sea level is higher closest to the moon (as might well be expected) but also higher on the far side (less obvious) as the force on the oceans there is less than at the midpoint. as the earth spins on its axis, these two bulges rotate around the earth so we normally get two high tides per day. as the moon is also moving around the earth in a period not too far off 24 days the two high tides will appear earlier by about 1 h per day.