(see the box at the end of this section.) as time is relative can we actually deﬁ ne a time standard with which to observe the evolution of the universe? one could, perhaps, deﬁ ne what might be called cosmic time as that measured by a clock that is stationary with respect to the uni- verse as a whole. how would this time relate to clocks on earth? we know that the earth is moving around the sun, and that the sun is moving around the centre of our milky way galaxy once every ∼220 million years. can we measure how fast the solar system is moving with respect to the universe? perhaps surprisingly, we can. in chapter 9 we will see how observations have been made of what is called the cosmic microwave background (cmb) – radiation that originated near the time of its origin and which now pervades the whole universe. this radiation is very largely composed of a mix of long wavelength infrared and very short wavelength radio waves – it has a ‘black body spectrum’ that will be discussed in chapter 2. for simplicity, just suppose that it is made up of only one wavelength and that the solar system is moving in a certain direction with respect to this radiation.
the doppler effect will alter the apparent wavelength that we observe so that, when looking along the direction in which the solar system is moving, it will be blue shifted and appear to have a shorter wavelength. conversely, in the opposite direction, the radiation will appear to be red shifted and have a longer wavelength. from very precise measurements of the cmb we now know that we are moving towards the constellation leo at a speed of ∼650 km s"1 (2 340 000 km h"1 or astronomy, an observational science 15 about 0.22% of the speed of light). this is our speed with respect to the universe as a whole. we can thus calculate how the time of a clock at rest with the universe – measuring cosmic time – will differ from our clocks. to do this we need to derive the formula that determines the observed time dilation as a function of relative speed. this is not difﬁ cult if we can imagine a very simple ‘clock’. the clock is made by reﬂ ecting a photon back and forth between a pair of perfect mirrors separated by a distance, d, as seen in figure 1.9a.
our ‘tick’ happens every time the photon reﬂ ects off the lower mirror and so the photon will travel a distance 2d between each tick. our fundamental time period, t1, will thus be given by: t1 ! 2d/c suppose we observe such a clock moving past us at speed v. we will see the situa- tion in figure 1.9b. as seen from our point of view, the photon will have to travel a longer distance, l, between each tick. this distance is given by: l ! [(2d)2 " (vt2)2]1/2 the time interval between each tick, t2, will then be given by: t2 ! l/c ! [(4d2 " v2t2 2)/c2]1/2 (c has been squared and put inside the square root.) figure 1.9 (a) a photon clock at rest with the observer and (b) a photon clock moving at a speed v with respect to the observer.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page36_img1.jpeg] 16 introduction to astronomy and cosmology squaring both sides and cross multiplying gives; t2 2c2 ! 4d2 " v2t2 2 we can now relate t2 and t1 to v by substituting for d from above using d2 ! t1 2c2/4, giving: t2 2c2 ! t1 2c2 " v2t2 2 and t2 2(c2 # v2) ! t1 2c2 so, ﬁ nally, t2/t1 ! [c2/(c2 # v2)]1/2 or, t2/t1 ! 1/[1 # (v2/c2)]1/2 this is the time dilation formula, giving the ratio of time intervals as a function of the relative speed v. we can now enter our speed with respect to the universe, 650 km s#1, into this equation and get the ratio 1.0000023. this is exceedingly small so, to a very good approximation, our clocks can be used to measure the timescale of the universe.