figure 2.18 the shapiro delay. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page93_img1.jpeg] our solar system 1 – the sun 73 3. a star has twice the diameter and twice the surface temperature of our sun. how will its luminosity compare with that of our sun? 4. a planet lies at a distance of 3 ! 1011 m from the central star of its solar system. the solar constant is measured to be 280 w m"2. what is the total energy output of the star? the angular diameter of the star, as measured from the planet, is 22 arcmin. estimate the surface temperature of the star. 5. an eclipse of the sun is to occur on the day of the vernal equinox and when the earth is at a distance of 150 million km from the sun. the eclipse track passes over the equator at 12:00 local solar time. show that, if the moon is at its furthest point from the earth (at apogee) that day, the eclipse as observed from the equator will be an annular, not a total, eclipse.
show also that if the moon were to be closest to the earth that day (at perigee) there would be a total eclipse. (the equatorial radius of the earth is 6378 km. the semi-major axis of the moon’s orbit is 384 401 km and the eccentricity of its orbit is 0.056. its diameter is 3474.8 km. the diameter of the sun is 139 million km.) 6. following the summer exams, two astrophysics students had been sunbathing on a ﬂ at beach in sweden (latitude: #62°) at 12:00 local solar time on june 21. in the evening, the students decided to estimate the number of neutrinos per second passing through their bodies that morning. their lecture notes told them that the earth’s axis is tilted at 23.5° to the plane of the ecliptic, the solar constant was ∼1300 w m"2, that one proton–proton cycle converted 4.6 ! 10"29 kg of mass into energy and they knew that the velocity of light is 3 ! 108 m s"1.
the students realised that it was not necessary to know how far the earth was from the sun and quickly came up with a result. what might the result have been, assuming that the cross-sectional area of a prone student was 1 m2? (note: you can get a pretty good result ignoring where and when they were, but some of you might like to give a more accurate result. if the earth’s equator was in the plane of the solar system, the sun would remain at declination zero. given a tilt of the earth’s rotation axis of θ°, the sun’s declination will vary between #θ° and "θ° over the year.) our solar system 2 – the planets the ﬁ rst part of this chapter will look at our own solar system as an example of solar systems in general (figure 3.1). it will discuss aspects of planetary orbits, how the sun’s radiation and the properties of the planets determine their sur- face temperatures and how atmospheres form and change during the lifetime of a planet. the second part will give a survey of the individual planets of our solar system, highlighting interesting aspects related to their properties, discovery and satel- lites.
such a survey could (and often does) have a complete book devoted to it, and the student is encouraged to use such books or the web to learn more. 3.1 what is a planet? this question was not seriously considered until a meeting of the international astronomical union (iau) in august 2006. there had never been a formal deﬁ ni- tion of what should, or should not, be a planet and for some time the minor planet ceres, which is the largest body in the asteroid belt between mars and jupiter, had also been classed as a planet. in 2005, the discovery of a body (initially called 2003 ub313) was announced. it is slightly larger than pluto and was at a distance of 96.7 au from the sun (three times the distance of pluto). this required a decision as to whether it should become the 10th planet of the solar system or whether, instead, pluto should be demoted. pluto is considerably smaller than it was thought to be when ﬁ rst discovered and has a highly elliptical orbit inclined at a large angle to the plane of the solar system.