the uni- verse had no beginning and will have no end and is, as the theory’s name implies, in a ‘steady state’. as new matter is continuously being created, it is also called the theory of continuous creation. 9.6 big bang or steady state? in the early 1960s observational tests were made to decide between the two theories. suppose one could measure the galaxy density close to us – to give the number of galaxies per cubic megaparsec. as these galaxies are close to us we see them essen- tially at the present time. if we could then measure the density of galaxies in the far universe, we would be measuring it at some time in the past. in the steady state model these results should be the same, but in the big bang model the density should have been higher in the past. martin ryle at cambridge attempted such measurements by counting radio sources. though there were problems with his initial data, these results did ﬁ nally indicate a greater density of radio sources in the past so disproving the steady state theory. the deathblow to the steady state theory came in 1963 when radiation, believed to have come from the big bang, was discovered.
the origin, discovery and study of this radiation will form a major part of the cosmological story to follow. 9.7 the cosmic microwave background it was the american physicist, george gamow, who ﬁ rst realised that the big bang should have resulted in radiation that would still pervade the universe. this radiation is now called the cosmic microwave background (cmb). initially in the form of very high-energy gamma rays, the radiation became less energetic as the universe expanded and cooled, so that by a time some 300–400 thousand years after the origin the peak of the radiation was in the optical part of the spectrum. up to that time the typical photon energy was sufﬁ ciently high to prevent the formation of hydrogen and helium atoms and thus the universe was composed 310 introduction to astronomy and cosmology of hydrogen and helium nuclei and free electrons – so forming a plasma. the electrons would have scattered photons rather as water droplets scatter light in a fog and thus the universe would have been opaque.
this close interaction between the matter and radiation in the universe gave rise to two critical conse- quences: ﬁ rst, the radiation would have a black body spectrum corresponding to the then temperature of the universe; and secondly, the distribution of the nuclei and electrons (normal matter) would have a uniform density except on the very largest scales. we will return to the second consequence later, but now will continue with the first. as the universe expanded and cooled there finally came a time, ∼380 000 years after the origin, when the typical photon energy became low enough to allow atoms to form. there were then no free electrons left to scatter radiation so the universe became transparent. this is thus as far back in time as we are able to see. at this time the universe had a tempera- ture of ∼3000k. since that time, the universe has expanded by about 1000 times. the wavelengths of the photons that made up the cmb will also have increased by 1000 times and so will now be in the far infrared and radio part of the spectrum but would still have a black body spectrum. the effective black body temperature of this radiation will have fallen by just the same factor and would thus now be ∼3 k.
9.7.1 the discovery of the cosmic microwave background radio astronomers arno penzias and robert wilson serendipitously discovered this background radiation in 1963. however, incontrovertible proof as to its origin had to wait until 1992 when the cobe satellite was able to show that the background radiation had the precise black body spectrum that would have been expected (figure 9.6). it is worth telling a little of the nobel prize winning story of its discovery. penzias and wilson had been given use of the telescope and receiver that had been used for the very first passive satellite communication experiments using a large aluminium covered balloon called ‘echo’. it had been designed to minimize any extraneous noise that might enter the horn shaped telescope and the receiver was one of the best in the world at that time. they tested the system thoroughly and found that there was more background noise produced than they expected. they wondered if it might have been caused by pigeons nesting within the horn – the pigeons, being at ∼290 k, would radiate radio noise – and bought a pigeon trap (now in the smithsonian air and space museum in washington) to catch the pigeons.