auroras are caused by the collision of charged particles with atoms high in the earth’s upper atmosphere. as the earth’s ﬁ eld lines open out into space above the north and south magnetic poles, charged particles may more easily reach the upper atmosphere in the regions near the magnetic poles. there they collide with atoms of gases in the atmosphere, and lift electrons into higher energy levels. the figure 2.14 the path of solar wind particles towards the polar regions of the earth. image: wikipedia commons. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page87_img1.jpeg] our solar system 1 – the sun 67 electrons then cascade down to their ground states so emitting light. most light appears to be emitted by emissions from atomic oxygen, resulting in a greenish glow at a wavelength of 557.7 nm and a dark-red glow at 630.0 nm. amongst the many other colours that are sometimes observed, excited atomic nitrogen gives a blue colour whilst molecular nitrogen produces a purple hue. often the auroral glow is in the form of ‘curtains’ that tend to be aligned in an east–west direction. sometimes these curtains change slowly but at other times they seem to be in continuous motion.
their shape is determined by the direction of the earth’s ﬁ eld in the region of the observer and observations have shown that electrons from the solar wind spiral down magnetic ﬁ eld lines towards the earth. the author can testify to the awesome sight that results when ﬁ eld lines guide electrons down to a bright auroral patch directly above the observer. due to perspective, the converg- ing auroral rays appear as vertical rays of light reaching upwards to what is called a ‘corona’ overhead (figure 2.15). 2.9 solar eclipses due to the tidal interactions between the earth and the moon, the moon is gradually moving further away from the earth. the fact that it now has an angular size which is usually just greater than that of our sun gives rise to what is probably the most spectacular of celestial events – a total solar eclipse. figure 2.15 an auroral display. image: wikipedia commons.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page88_img1.jpeg] 68 introduction to astronomy and cosmology to give a total eclipse, the moon must lie in the plane of the solar system (the plane containing the earth and sun), be at new moon and have an angular size greater than that of the sun. the moon’s orbit is inclined at 5° to the plane of the solar system, so it will usually be above or below the plane at the time of new moon so we do not get solar eclipses every month. typically, there will be a solar eclipse visible somewhere on the earth every 18 months. however, an eclipse is not necessarily total. both the earth and the moon have elliptical orbits. if the moon is furthest from the earth (at what is called apogee, so making the moon’s angular size smaller) and the earth is closest to the sun (at perihelion, so making the sun’s angular size bigger) then the moon cannot cover the sun completely and we get what is called an annular eclipse when a ring of the sun is still visible around the edge of the moon.
this is often called a ‘ring of ﬁ re’ and is particularly spectacular when seen close to dawn or dusk when the sun’s light is reddened. during a total eclipse the moon’s shadow will ﬁ rst touch the earth’s surface at the start of what is termed the ‘eclipse track’ (figure 2.16). the width and length of the track will depend on positions of the moon and earth in their orbits. close to the earth’s equator, the moon is nearer to the earth’s surface than at the poles so its angular size is greater and the eclipse track is wider, so it is here that the lon- gest period of totality can be observed. the longest possible total eclipse is approxi- mately 7 min 30 s long. this would be observed at the equator when the earth is at aphelion (farthest from the sun) and the moon is at perigee (closest to the earth). the longest eclipse that may be observed in the next 3000 years is on july 16, 2186 and this will have a duration of 7 min 29 s.