but this view was countered with the fact that astronomy is a wonderful showcase for physics and this text covers aspects of physics ranging through newton’s and einstein’s theories of gravity, par- ticle and nuclear physics and even quantum mechanics. not all of the material covered by the course was examinable; in particular the descriptions of the planets in our solar system and the background to some of the key discoveries of the last century. however, the author believes that this helps to give life to the subject and so these parts of the course have not been left out. wherever possible, calculations have been included to illustrate all aspects of the book’s material, but the level of mathematics required is not high and should be well within the capabilities of ﬁ rst year undergraduates. the questions with each chapter have come from course examination papers and tutorial exercises and should thus be representative of the type of questions that might be asked of students studying an astronomy course based on this book. some textbooks are rightly described as “worthy but dull”. it is the author’s earnest hope that this book would not ﬁ t this description and that, as well a conveying the basics of astronomy in an accessible way, it will be enjoyable to read.
if, perhaps, the book could inspire some who have used it to continue their study of astronomy so that, in time, they might themselves contribute to our understanding of the universe, then it would have achieved all that its author could possibly hope for. acknowledgements the author would like to thank those who have helped this book to become a reality: the students who tested the questions and commented on the course material, my colleagues phillipa brown- ing, neil jackson, michael peel and peter millington who carefully read through drafts of the text and the team at wiley; zoe mills, gemma valler, wendy harvey, andy slade and richard davies who have provided help and encouragement during its writing and production. no matter how hard we have all tried, the text may well contain some mistakes – for which the author takes full responsibility! to help eradicate them, should there be future editions, he would be most grateful if you could send comments and corrections via the website: http://www. jb.man.ac.uk/public/im/astronomy.html this will provide additional supporting material for the book and a (hopefully small) list of corrections.
preface xvii author’s biography ian morison began his love of astronomy when, at the age of 12, he made a tele- scope out of lenses given to him by his optician. he went on to study physics, mathematics and astronomy at oxford and in 1970 was appointed to the staff of the university of manchester where he now teaches astronomy, computing and electronics. he is a past president of the society for popular astronomy, one of the uk’s largest astronomical societies. he rem- ains on the society’s council and holds the post of instrument advisor helping members with their choice and use of telescopes. he lectures widely on astronomy, has co-authored books for amateur astronomers and writes regularly for the two uk astronomy magazines. he also writes a monthly sky guide for the jodrell bank observatory’s web site and produces an audio version as part of the jodrell bank podcast. he has con- tributed to many television programmes and is a regular astronomy commentator on local and national radio. another activity he greatly enjoys is to take amateur astronomers on observing trips such as those to lapland to see the aurora borealis and on expeditions to turkey and china to observe total eclipses of the sun.
in 2003 the minor planets committee of the international astronomical union named asteroid 15,727 in his honour, citing his work with merlin, the world’s largest linked array of radio telescopes, and that in searching for intelligent life beyond our solar system in project phoenix. in 2007 he was appointed to the post of gresham professor of astronomy. dating from 1597, this is the oldest astronomy professorship in the world and was once held by christopher wren. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page20_img1.jpeg] astronomy, an observational science 1.1 introduction astronomy is probably the oldest of all the sciences. it differs from virtually all other science disciplines in that it is not possible to carry out experimental tests in the laboratory. instead, the astronomer can only observe what he sees in the universe and see if his observations ﬁ t the theories that have been put forward. astronomers do, however, have one great advantage: in the universe, there exist extreme states of matter which would be impossible to create here on earth. this allows astronomers to make tests of key theories, such as albert einstein’s general theory of relativity.