the radial velocity of a 1 solar mass star is seen to vary sinusoidally by !/"30 m s"1 with a period of 1460 days. assuming that the earth lay in the plane of the orbit of the object causing this stellar motion, calculate its distance from the star in astronomical units (au) and its mass in jovian masses. (assume that the simple form of kepler’s third law is valid, where p2 # r3 when p is in years and r is in au. 1 au # 1.49 $ 1011 m, and jupi- ter is 0.001 solar masses.) 2. the current precision of the doppler shifts in the absorption lines in stellar spectra is ∼3 km s"1. show that it would not be possible to detect the presence of the earth from a distant solar system using the doppler method. state one method that might allow the earth to be detected. (the earth’s mass is 1/333 000 that of the sun. 1 au # 1.49 $ 1011 m.) 152 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 3. a planet has been discovered orbiting the sun-like star hd 209458.
from the period and velocity measured by the doppler method, its mass was calculated to be 0.69 times that of jupiter. the plane of the planet’s orbit is edge-on and it has been observed to transit across the face of the star. the light from the star was seen to drop by 1.7% when the planet’s disc lay fully within that of the star which has a radius of 8 ! 105 km. assuming that the brightness of the star is constant across the observed face, estimate the diameter of the planet and hence it density in comparison with that of jupiter which has a radius of 7.1 ! 104 km. observing the universe this chapter will show how, over the centuries, telescopes observing across the whole of the electromagnetic spectrum have been developed so enabling us to study the universe with ever increasing ability. 5.1 thinking about optics in terms of waves rather than rays textbooks and optical design programs describe the working of an optical system, be it a simple lens or a complex telescope, in terms of ray tracing: where the path of a light ray is refracted at the surface of a lens or reﬂ ected at the surface of a mirror.
ray tracing implies that, if all the rays traced through an optical system pass through one point, then the system will give a good focus. a simple exam- ple is the comparison of a parabolic mirror with a spherical mirror as shown in figure 5.1. however, in the author’s view this is not quite the whole truth and a focus, as given by ray tracing, is a ‘necessary but not sufﬁ cient’ requirement for producing a good image. 5.1.1 the parabolic mirror the fundamental requirement is to do with coherence. imagine a wavefront arriving from a source, say a star (this is an astronomy book!) that is effectively at inﬁ nity. in this case the wavefront will have no curvature and is called a plane wavefront. what does this mean? simply that light everywhere across the wave- front left the star at the same time and is said to be coherent. you may have seen a wave represented by a rotating vector which rotates once as the wave advances one wavelength through space. the angle of the vector, which conventionally rotates in an anticlockwise sense, deﬁ nes the phase of the wave.
so, if we split up our plane wavefront into little bits – we could call them wavelets – we could represent each wavelet as a rotating vector with each wavelet having the same phase. if, through an optical system, we can bring all these wavelets together to chapter 5 introduction to astronomy and cosmology ian morison © 2008 john wiley & sons, ltd 154 introduction to astronomy and cosmology one point each having travelled for the same time from a plane wavefront (and hence the source) then the vectors of the wavelets will all have the same phase and will add coherently (in a vector addition) to give a true focus. at other locations within the optical system the wavelets will add with varying phases so that the resultant will, in general, tend to zero. figure 5.2 using a parabolic mirror will hopefully make this clear. at the focus all the vectors are in phase so the vector addition gives a large resultant but away from the focus the resultant is effectively zero.