as we will see in a later chapter, the existence of such gravitational waves has already been shown indirectly and it is likely that, before long, direct evidence of their existence will be gained. this concept came out of einstein’s 1915 paper on ‘the general theory of relativity’. (please note: it is not, as is often stated, ‘the theory of general relativ- ity’ although in shorthand it is often referred to correctly as ‘general relativity’.) in essence, this is a relativistic theory of gravity in which gravity is a concept that we infer to explain what we observe. general relativity regards that the motion of objects through space not in a straight line is due, not to a force applied to it as in newtonian gravity, but is its natural path in space which has been ‘curved’ due to the presence of mass. (to be precise, we should use the term space–time rather than space, but this is an introductory text!) in einstein’s view, in the absence of mass, space is ﬂ at. this term (which the author does not like as it implies that space is two-dimensional) actually means that within ‘ﬂ at space’ euclidean geometry holds true.
that is, if one lays out a large triangle in any orientation in space, the inscribed angles will add up to 180°. a second property of ‘ﬂ at space’ is that two initially parallel laser beams separated by some distance will remain parallel. if, now, mass is introduced into ﬂ at space, the space around it becomes curved and light or matter will follow curved, rather than straight trajectories. an anal- ogy can help. imagine a stretched horizontal ﬂ at rubber sheet. ball bearings will roll across it in straight lines. if a lead ball is now laid on the sheet it will cause a depression (figure 1.20) and, if ball bearings now come close to the depression, they will follow curved lines. in einstein’s view, the orbital motion of the earth around the sun is simply the natural motion of a body through curved space – the force we perceive is actually just a consequence of curved space–time. astronomy, an observational science 35 let us consider a further ‘thought experiment’. imagine that the northern hemisphere of a large planet had a totally frictionless surface. the inhabit- ants have an unshakeable belief that the surface of their planet is flat.
two explorers set off simultaneously on sledges from two points, 10 km apart, on the equator. they travel on parallel paths pointing true north with identical initial velocities. as there is no friction, they will continue at the same speed and would expect to remain 10 km apart. they will thus be somewhat sur- prised (and possibly hurt) when they collide at the north pole! they might try and explain how this could have happened without giving up their belief that the surface of their planet is flat. the only way that they could do this would be to postulate a force – that they might call gravity – that attracted them towards each other. in the same way, gravity is a force that we infer to explain what happens in a curved three-dimensional space if we assume that space is ﬂ at, not curved. figure 1.20 a rubber sheet analogy of the distortion of space–time by mass. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page56_img1.jpeg] 36 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 1.12 conclusion this chapter has brought us from the middle of the sixteenth century to the start of the twentieth century and picked out some key advances in our understanding of the universe.
several concepts described in this chapter will be used later in the book: • the observed apparent magnitude of a star is one requirement for the calculation of its luminosity. • accurate measurement of time is vital in the study of pulsars which are the rotating remnants of supernova explosions. • when we consider binary star systems, we will use a form of kepler’s third law, as modiﬁ ed by newton, to carry out calculations where the two orbiting masses are comparable. • newton’s law of gravity and the measured value of g, the universal constant of gravitation, will be used to calculate the mass of the sun. • without a precise knowledge of planetary orbits and the scale size of the solar system as determined by the measurement of the astronomical unit, it would have been impossible to send spacecraft to orbit and land on the moon and planets, and our knowledge of the solar system would be greatly limited. • einstein’s theory of general relativity underpins the whole subject of cosmology – the evolution of the universe. the astronomers and physicists whose work is described in this chapter have thus given a very solid foundation on which modern astronomy and our understanding of the universe is built. 1.13 questions 1.