this explains why the crab nebula could be still visible. it was known that a star close to the centre of the nebula had a very strange spectrum. if this were the neu- tron star associated with the supernova explosion, its energy output would have kept the gas thrown out into the interstellar medium excited, so remaining visible. the way in which this was conﬁ rmed and how, to date, nearly 2000 neutron stars have been discovered is one of the most interesting stories of modern astronomy. 7.11 the discovery of pulsars when observations of stars through the earth’s atmosphere were described ear- lier it was pointed out that stars scintillate (‘twinkle’ is a rather nice if not scientiﬁ c term that is often used). this is because irregularities in the atmosphere passing between the observer and the star act like alternate convex and concave lenses which sequentially converge the light from the star (so making it appear slightly brighter) and then diverge it (so reducing its brightness). it was pointed out that planets do not scintillate to any signiﬁ cant degree. their angular size means that the light is passing through a large number of adjacent atmospheric cells and the effects average out.
there is a similar effect related to radio sources caused by irregularities in the solar wind – bubbles of gas which stream out from the sun expanding as they do so. it was realised that this could lead to a way of investigating the angular sizes of radio sources by studying the amount of scintillation observed when the source was at different angular distances from the sun. it would also be a way of discovering radio sources with very small angular sizes such as quasars which will be described in chapter 8. to carry out this experiment a very large antenna was required and tony hewish at the mullard radio astronomy laboratories at cambridge recruited a phd student called jocelyn bell to ﬁ rst help build the antenna (made up of an array of 2048 dipoles) and then carry out and analyse the observations (figure 7.12). the array observed radio sources as they passed due south so a given radio source would be observed every sidereal day as it appeared on the meridian. the signals from radio sources appeared on a roll of chart, about 400 ft (∼122 m) of which was produced each day.
soon bell was able to distinguish between the scintillating signal of a radio source and interference, often from cars passing the observatory. in july she observed a ‘little bit of scruff’ that did not look like a scintillating radio source but did not appear like interference either. a second intriguing feature was that it had been observed at night when a radio source would be seen away from the direction of the sun and scintillation would not be expected to be seen. looking through the charts, she discovered that a similar stellar evolution – the life and death of stars 253 signal had been seen earlier from the same location in the sky. she observed that it reappeared again at always a precise number of sidereal days later which implied that the radio source, whatever it was, was amongst the stars rather that within the solar system. hewish and bell then equipped the receiver with a high speed chart recorder to observe the ‘scruff’ in more detail and discovered to their amaze- ment that it was not random, but a series of precisely spaced radio pulses having a period of 1.33724 s.
observations using a different telescope at cambridge conﬁ rmed the presence of the signal and also the fact that the pulse arrived at slightly different times as the frequency of observation was changed. this effect is called dispersion, and is exactly similar to the fact that different wavelengths of light travel at different speeds in glass. the interstellar medium is not a perfect vacuum and so can cause this effect but it would be only observed if the source of the pulses was far beyond the solar system. at that time, no one in the radio astronomy group at cambridge group could conceive of a natural phenomenon that could give rise to such highly precise peri- odic signals – it seemed that no star, not even a white dwarf could pulsate at such a fast rate – and they wondered if it might be a signal from an extraterrestrial civilization. bell, who called the source lgm1 (little green men 1), was some- what annoyed about this as it was disrupting her real observations. when, later, a second source with similar characteristics but a slight faster period of 1.2 s was figure 7.12 jocelyn bell with the cambridge array (which discovered the ﬁ rst pulsar) and the discovery record.