this gave protection to emerging life forms from ultraviolet light and enabled them to exist on land as well as in the oceans. by about 200 million years ago about 35% of the atmosphere was oxy- gen. the remainder of the atmosphere was largely nitrogen as, alone of all the gases present in the secondary atmosphere, it does not readily dissolve in water. volcanic activity recycles and replenishes the molecules of the atmosphere and has, in particular, recycled the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide – necessary for the earth’s surface temperature to have remained sufﬁ ciently warm for the existence of life. the carbonates, formed as carbon dioxide dissolves in the oceans, and shells of calcium carbonate produced by marine life, fall to the ocean beds. thus, over time, one might expect the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere to reduce, tending to make the earth colder. however, movements of the oceanic plates of the earth’s crust bring them up against the continental plates. as the oceanic plates are denser, they pass under the continental plates – a process known as subduction – and volcanic activity releases the carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere.
3.5 the planets of the solar system our knowledge of the solar system has increased dramatically in the last 50 years by the use of spacecraft that have ﬂ own by, orbited and even landed on the planets giving us high resolution images and detailed planetary data. this section will summarize some of the most interesting aspects of the individual planets of our solar system but does not, in any way, pretend to be exhaustive. the information included is that which has been found of most interest by the author and he can only hope that you will ﬁ nd it interesting too. 88 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 3.5.1 mercury mass 3.3 !
1023 kg 0.055 that of earth mean radius 2439.7 km 0.383 that of earth escape velocity 4.25 km s"1 rotation period 58.646 days semi-major axis of orbit 57 909 068 km 0.387 au average orbital speed 47.87 km eccentricity 0.2053 period 87.97 days orbital inclination 7° due to mercury’s close proximity to the sun it may only be observed for relatively short periods at a time and, seen from the earth, its surface markings are not very distinct. both these factors contributed to an initially erroneous value for its rota- tion period which was thought to be the same as its orbital period. mercury would then have been tidally locked to the sun with one face continuously towards, and one face away, from the sun. radio observations indicated that mercury’s ‘dark’ side was considerably warmer than would have been expected should it have always faced away from the sun and radar studies have since shown that mercury rotates about its axis with a period two-thirds that of its orbital period.
mercury has only ever been visited by two spacecraft: mariner 10, which made three ﬂ y-bys in the mid 1970s; and the messenger spacecraft, which ﬂ ew by early in 2008 (figure 3.5). mercury looks very like the highland regions of the moon. in 1991, mercury was observed by radar using the 70-m goldstone antenna with a half-million watt transmitter. the radar reﬂ ections were received by the very large array in new mexico to provide high resolution radar images. to great surprise, a very strong reﬂ ection was received from mercury’s north polar region which strongly resembled the strong radar echoes seen from the ice-rich polar caps of mars. at very low temperatures water ice is a very effective radar reﬂ ector. one would not expect to ﬁ nd ice on mercury, but close to the north and south poles the crater ﬂ oors are permanently in shade with temperatures as low as 125 k, so any ice existing there could remain for billions of years. it is thought that the ice, also later observed at the south pole, is the remnant of comets that have impacted with mercury in the past.