5.9.3 the maksutov–cassegrain telescope the maksutov is a catadioptric telescope design, developed by the russian optical specialist dmitri maksutov in 1941, which employs a full diameter meniscus lens to correct the problems of off-axis aberrations. they are usually of a cassegrain form, with the secondary mirror either silvered on the inner face of the correc- tor lens or supported by it as shown in figure 5.13. the result is a very compact telescope that gives a relatively wide ﬁ eld of view and excellent quality images. as large aperture corrector plates are difﬁ cult to manufacture, their professional application is limited. 5.10 active and adaptive optics given a perfect telescope used in space, resolution is directly proportional to the inverse of the telescope diameter. a plane wavefront from a distant star would form an image, with an angular resolution only limited by the diffraction of light and the telescope is said to be diffraction limited. however, in practice, turbulence figure 5.13 catadioptric telescopes.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page195_img1.jpeg] observing the universe 175 in the atmosphere distorts the wavefront, creating phase errors across the mirror. even at the best sites, ground-based telescopes observing at visible wavelengths cannot achieve an angular resolution better than telescopes of about 20 cm diameter. wavefront errors are also caused by inaccuracies in the mirror’s sur- face and effects caused by gravitational and thermal changes in the mirror and its support structure. the wavefront errors are thus of two types: (1) slowly changing errors due to gravitational and thermal effects on the mirror. these are corrected by active optics systems. (2) rapidly changing errors due to the turbulence in the atmosphere. these are corrected by adaptive optics systems. 5.10.1 active optics this is the term used to describe the methods used to correct for slow changes in the mirror and its telescope structure. in a typical system the mirror – which is relatively thin – is supported by a large number of actuators (perhaps 150 in number) which can be moved to apply forces to the rear surface of the mirror and so adjust the surface proﬁ le.
periodically the image of a star is analysed, taking about 30 s, and a computer calculates the errors in the surface that would give rise to the observed image. the computer then calculates the correction which each actuator has to apply to achieve optimal image quality. 5.10.2 adaptive optics this is the term used to describe the correction of phase errors caused by the atmo- sphere. across a large mirror, rapidly changing phase errors equivalent to a few micrometres path length result. if there is a reasonably bright star in the ﬁ eld of view (which should give an image which is that of an airy disc whose angular size is determined by the aperture of the telescope) its actual, distorted, image can be analysed in a computer and corrections applied to correct for the waveform errors and so produce a diffraction limited image. it would be quite impossible to correct the primary mirror at the required rate of every few milliseconds to the required precision of ∼1/50th of a micrometre so, instead, a small (8–20 cm) deformable mirror is used in the light path whose surface proﬁ le is controlled by hundreds of piezoelectric actuators which move to compensate for the atmospheric effects.
in the near infrared (as the wavelengths are longer) it is easier to fully correct the wavefront and so give a diffraction limited performance, but such systems can still provide an improvement of perhaps ten times at visible wavelengths. 176 introduction to astronomy and cosmology often a suitable reference star will not be found in the ﬁ eld of view that includes the target object, so artiﬁ cial reference stars are now being created by ﬁ ring a laser which excites sodium atoms in the upper atmosphere at an altitude of ∼90 km. such an artiﬁ cial reference star can be created as close to the astronomical target as desired, but a lookout has to be kept for high ﬂ ying aircraft! 5.11 some signiﬁ cant optical telescopes 5.11.1 gemini north and south telescopes the gemini observatory comprises two 8.1-m telescopes; gemini north (figure 5.14) is located on mauna kea, hawaii at a height of 4214 m whilst gemini south is at a height of 2737m on cerro pachón, chile.