if their sizes are measured on a photographic plate then one can compare them to a galaxy, hoped to be similar is size, whose distance we do know. in a similar vein, one could take the magnitude of the galaxy and use that to estimate its distance. the most distant galaxies ever observed are in the hubble ultra deep field shown in figure 8.27. some are observed at a time just 0.7 billion years after the origin of the universe, just 5% of its present age. 8.3.8 the structure of the universe galaxies, in their groups, clusters and superclusters, extend across the visible uni- verse, and recently it has been possible to map their distribution through space. figure 8.28 shows a panoramic view of the entire sky images in the near infrared and reveals the distribution of galaxies beyond the milky way, shown in the cen- tre of the image. the galaxies are colour coded by ‘redshift’; in blue are the nearest galaxies, green are at moderate distances and red are the most distant. the distribution is not uniform, but appears rather like the structure of a sponge. in analogy, the galaxies are located on the walls of the sponge and few are found within the empty spaces within the sponge.
these nearly empty regions 298 introduction to astronomy and cosmology are called voids. how and why this structure has evolved over the life of the uni- verse will be discussed in chapter 9. 8.4 questions 1. use ‘google’ to ﬁ nd the website for the digitized sky survey. it is possible to ask to observe a speciﬁ c object and produce an image in gif format. you might like to try this to produce an image of m81. first enter m81 into the ‘object name’ box and click on ‘get coordinates’. then enter 30 and 30 as the width and height – the units are in arcminutes. select ‘gif’ as the ﬁ le format and ﬁ nally click on ‘retrieve image’. an image of the region around m81 should then appear on your screen. figure 8.27 the hubble ultra deep field. image: beckwith and the hudf working group (stsci), hst, esa, nasa. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page319_img1.jpeg] galaxies and the large scale structure of the universe 299 the spiral galaxy m81 lies at a distance of 12 million light years.
the width of its hydrogen line spectrum is 300 km s!1. from the image you have obtained, estimate the angular diameter of m81 and hence ﬁ nd its approximate radius in kilometres. estimate its mass in solar masses following the same reasoning as given with regards to m33. (1 solar mass " 2 # 1030 kg, 1 light year " 9.46 # 1012 km, g " 6.67 # 10!11 m3 kg!1 s!2.) 2. observations of the central region of the galaxy m87 indicate that stars which are 60 light years from the centre are orbiting the central super- massive black hole at a speed of 550 km s!1. estimate the mass of the black hole in solar masses. (the earth orbits the sun with an orbital speed of 30 km s!1. 1 light year is 63240 au.) 3. the emission from the region surrounding an accreting super-massive black hole is seen to vary signiﬁ cantly on the time scale of 12 h.
knowing that light takes 8.32 light min to travel from the sun to the earth, estimate the size of the region in astronomical units (au). 4. a cepheid variable star is observed in a distant galaxy. it has a period of 100 days and a peak brightness 12 magnitudes less than the brightness of a 100-day period, type ii cepheid variable observed in the large magellanic cloud (lmc). given that the lmc lies at a distance of 50 000 pc from our sun, calculate the distance from our sun to the distant galaxy. figure 8.28 the structure of the local universe. image: t. jarett (ipac/caltech), wikipedia commons. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page320_img1.jpeg] cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 9.1 einstein’s blunder? modern cosmology arose from einstein’s general theory of relativity which, as we have seen, is essentially a theory of gravity (figure 9.1). as gravity was the only force of inﬁ nite range that could act on neutral matter, einstein realised that the universe as a whole must obey its laws.