if a particle is adjacent to a potential barrier, its wave function decays exponentially through the barrier, but will have still have a very small amplitude on the far side of the barrier. there is thus a very small probability that the particle can ‘appear’ on the other side of the barrier in which case it is then said to have tunnelled through it. quantum tunnelling thus allows a particle, in this case a proton, to violate the principles of classical mechanics by passing through a potential barrier higher than the kinetic energy of the particle. this then (very rarely) allows the two protons to come sufﬁ ciently close for the strong nuclear force to momentarily bind them together before one of the protons decays into a neutron, a positron and an electron neutrino (see box). this leaves a deuteron – the combination of a proton and a neutron which is the nucleus of deuterium. the positron then annihilates with an electron, and their mass energy is carried off by two (sometimes more) gamma ray photons. this is the ﬁ rst step in what is called the proton–proton cycle outlined below. positron a positron is the antimatter counterpart of the electron.
it has an electric charge of !1, a spin of 1/2, and the same mass as an electron. when a positron collides with an electron, annihilation occurs, resulting in the production of two (or more) gamma ray photons. neutrino a neutrino is an elementary particle that travels close to the speed of light, has no electric charge and only very rarely interacts with ordinary matter. they are thus extremely difﬁ cult to detect. as we will see, it is believed that neutrinos have a tiny, but non-zero mass. its name was coined by the italian physicist, enrico fermi. the ﬁ rst part of its name relates to it having no charge and ‘-ino’ implies ‘very small’ in italian. there are three known types (ﬂ avours) of neutrinos: electron neutrino, νe, muon neutrino, νµ and tau neutrino, νt. the ﬁ rst step in the proton–proton cycle is extremely slow, with a proton typically waiting 109 years before carrying out this reaction! it is thus the limiting step in the chain of nuclear reactions and so determines the overall reaction rate.
it might just be worth pointing out that the slowness of this reaction is vital to our presence here on earth. if the reaction rate was just 10 times faster, the sun would burn up its energy supply in 1 billion years rather than the ∼10 billion years that we will calculate below and there would not have been sufﬁ cient time for our human race to evolve! our solar system 1 – the sun 53 2.3.1 the proton–proton cycle the bulk of the sun’s energy comes from the main proton–proton cycle or pp i chain. this is a three-stage process: (1) two protons react to give rise to a deuteron comprising one proton and one neutron. the charge of one of the protons is carried away by a positron (the antiparticle of the electron). an electron neutrino is also created. (2) a further proton then reacts with the deuteron to give a nucleus comprising two protons and one neutron. it is thus an isotope of helium called helium-3. a gamma ray (very high energy photon) is emitted.
(3) two helium-3 nuclei react to give one helium nucleus (also called an alpha particle) and two protons are emitted to take part in further reactions. in chemical notation these steps are (figure 2.5): 1h1 (proton) ! 1h1 " 2h1 (deuteron) ! e! (positron) ! νe (electron-neutrino) 2h1 ! 1h1 " 3he2 (helium-3 nucleus) ! γ (gamma ray photon) 3he2 ! 3he2 " 4he2 (helium-4 nucleus) ! 1h1 ! 1h1 figure 2.5 the three steps in the proton–proton cycle. steps 1 and 2 are carried out twice to provide the two 3he2 nuclei required for the third step. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page74_img1.jpeg] 54 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the net result is thus: 4 1h1 ! 4he2 " 2e" " 2γ " 2νe this is not quite the end of the story.