it is not impossible that other life forms could exist based on phosphorus, arsenic and methane, but these would, the author suspects, be far less common. so, in most cases, we need locations where water is a liquid, such as the surface of a planet in its star’s habitable zone or perhaps an under-ice ocean of a satel- lite warmed by the tidal heating of a nearby giant planet. if we hope that other advanced civilizations such as our own exist then signiﬁ cant periods of time are needed – to allow the simple life forms that may arise a chance to evolve. in 1960, frank drake, who the previous year had made the ﬁ rst search for signals from an extra-terrestrial intelligence in project ozma, gathered a group of eminent scientists to try to estimate how likely it was that other intelligent civilizations existed in the galaxy and might perhaps be transmitting signals that we could detect by observing programs covered by the term seti (search for extraterrestrial intelligence). 9.15.1 the drake equation this group produced what has become known as the drake equation,which has two parts.
the ﬁ rst part attempts to calculate how often intelligent civilizations arise in the galaxy and the second is simply the period of time over which such a civilization might attempt to communicate with us once it has arisen. some of the factors in the equation are reasonably well known; such as the number of stars born each year in the galaxy, the percentage of these stars (like our sun) that are hot enough, but also live long enough, to allow intelligent life to arise and the percentage of these that have solar systems. others are far harder to estimate. for example, given a planet with a suitable environment, it seems likely that simple life will arise – it happened here virtually as soon as the earth could sustain life. however, it then took several billion years for multicellular life to arise and ﬁ nally evolve into an intelligent species. so it appears that a planet must retain an equable climate for a very long time. 330 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the conditions that allow this to happen on a planet may not be commonplace. our earth has a large moon which stabilizes its rotation axis. its surface is recycled through plate tectonics which release carbon dioxide, bound up into carbonates, back into the atmosphere.
this recycling has helped keep the earth warm enough for liquid water to remain on the surface and hence allow life to ﬂ ourish. jupiter’s presence has reduced the number of comets hitting the earth; such impacts have given the earth much of its water but too high an impact rate might well impede the evolution of an intelligent species. it could well be, as some have written, that we live on a ‘rare earth’. how many might there be amongst the stars? in addition, it has been widely assumed that once multicellular life formed, evolution would drive life towards intelligence, but this tenet has been challenged in recent years – a very well adapted, but not intelligent, species could perhaps remain dominant for considerable periods of time preventing the emergence of an intelligent species. the ﬁ nal factor in this part of the equation is the percentage of those civilizations capable of communicating with us who would actually choose to do so. our civilization could, but currently does not, attempt to communicate. indeed there are some who think that it would be unwise to make others aware that here on earth we have a nice piece of interstellar real estate!
any attempts at communi- cation have to be made in the very long term – the round travel time for a two- way conversation would stretch into hundreds or thousands of years. it would be hard at present to obtain funding for such a programme. it is often cited that perhaps between 10% and 20% of civilizations would choose to communicate, but i suspect that this may well be highly optimistic. the topic of ‘leakage’ radiation from, for example, radars and tv transmit- ters is often mentioned as a way of detecting advanced civilizations which do not choose to communicate. this, the author believes, unlikely. any signals that could be unintentionally detected over interstellar distances are, by deﬁ nition, waste- ful of energy. already, on earth, high power tv transmitters are being replaced with low power digital transmissions, satellite transmissions are very low power and ﬁ breoptic networks do not radiate at all. the ‘leakage’ phase is probably a very short time in the life of a civilization and one that we would be unlikely to catch.