in the green bank telescope each of the 2004 panels that make up the surface area is mounted on actuators located at each of their corners. a laser system, mounted close to the focus, is used to measure the precise position of each panel and to adjust them as necessary to compensate for the gravitational deformations. (this is equivalent to the tech- nique of active optics that is used for optical telescopes.) the swan neck holds the secondary mirror and receiver systems away from the path of radio waves falling on the primary reflector. this is called an offset-feed system. it prevents the supports that hold the secondary reflector and receivers scattering noise into the system. figure 5.21 the 76-m lovell telescope – a prime focus design. image: ian morison. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page206_img1.jpeg] 186 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 5.12.4 large ﬁ xed dishes currently the world’s largest radio telescope is the 305-m arecibo telescope in puerto rico (figure 5.24). it is built within a natural depression in the ground and has a spherical surface.
high above the dish is a complex system of secondary and tertiary mirrors in the receiver complex to correct for the inherent spherical aberration. the secondary mirror is itself 25 m in diameter! as a radio source moves across the sky it is ‘tracked’ by moving the secondary mirror and receiver complex along an arm suspended above the surface. a telescope called fast is being built in china which will have an overall diameter of 500 m. each of the 4600 panels that will make up the surface will be mounted on actuators so that, as a radio source moves above the telescope, part of the surface, approximately 300 m across, is formed into a parabolic sur- face to reﬂ ect incident radio waves up to a focus above the surface. the focus box is moved above the surface to follow the focal point by controlling the length of the support cables. this provides a coarse adjustment, with a laser controlled system to provide ﬁ ne control of the feed position within the focus box. this innovative telescope should be completed by 2013. figure 5.22 the 32-m cambridge telescope – a cassegrain design. the cone houses a carousel supporting four receivers. image: ian morison.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page207_img1.jpeg] observing the universe 187 figure 5.23 the 105-m robert c. byrd green bank telescope. image: national radio astronomy observatory. figure 5.24 the 305-m arecibo telescope. image courtesy of the naic – arecibo observatory, a facility of the nsf. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page208_img1.jpeg] [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page208_img2.jpeg] 188 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 5.12.5 telescope arrays the resolution provided at radio wavelengths by even the largest single dishes is far below that of even a small optical telescope. by linking a number of antennas into an array it is possible to synthesize a telescope whose effective size is given by the greatest separation of antennas in the array. consider a line of antennas 5 km long whose central antenna was located at the north pole. looking down from above, this line of telescopes would be seen to rotate and, in 12 h, would ﬁ ll out a circular area of diameter 5 km.
if the data received by all of the antennas during the 12 h period is processed in an appropriate way an image of the sky above can be produced whose resolution is equal to that of a 5-km telescope. as this depends on the rotation of the earth the technique is termed ‘earth rotation aperture synthesis’. it is obviously not practical to locate an array at the north pole, but providing one is not too near the equator the technique is viable. at each instant of observation, each pair of telescopes is measuring some information about the structure of the radio source depending on their separation and orientation relative to the radio source. due to the rotation of the earth, the information about the radio source changes throughout the observing period and this enables an image of the source to be created. if there are n antennas in the array there are n(n-1)/2 combinations. the signals from each antenna are brought to a central ‘correlator’. here delays have to be intro- duced into the signal path of each telescope so that the signals are combined coherently. three signiﬁ cant arrays are: • the very large array (vla) in the plains of new mexico (figure 5.25).