as figure 5.10 shows, the image of this object will lie a distance of (f ! θ/2), where θ is in radians, from the centre of the image. if the diameter of the ﬁ eld stop of the eyepiece is d, then d " 2 ! f ! θ/2 " f ! θ. so, the diameter of the ﬁ eld of view, θ, of a telescope whose focal length is f mm coupled with an eyepiece whose ﬁ eld stop has a diameter d mm, is given by d/f rad. as an example, consider a 1200 mm objective when used with an eyepiece whose ﬁ eld stop is 12 mm across. then θ is 1200/12 " 1/100 rad or 57.3/100° " 0.573°. this combination would thus nicely encompass an image of the moon which is ∼0.5° across.
the diameter of the ﬁ eld stop is approximately proportional to the focal length when eyepieces of similar design are used, so using a shorter focal length eyepiece gives greater magniﬁ cation at the expense of observing a smaller ﬁ eld of view. the plossl eyepiece, made up of two achromatic doublets, is very widely used as a ‘standard’ eyepiece. eyepieces using ﬁ ve or more elements can allow wider ﬁ eld stops for a given focal length and so allow a larger ﬁ eld of view to be observed. these are called ‘wide ﬁ eld’ eyepieces and can be very expensive. one might well think that as the magniﬁ cation is increased more detail will be seen. this is not necessarily so and it is very rare that magniﬁ cations greater than !200 will be useful. both the eye itself and the atmosphere play a part. the detail in an image observed by the eye is limited by two things: the diffraction effects due to the limited aperture of the eye and the density of the rods and cones in the retina.
the achievable resolution is limited by the aperture of the pupil, say 3 mm, which gives an airy disc whose size, ∆θ, is given by: ∆θ " 1.22 λ/d " 1.22 ! 5.5 ! 10#7/0.003 rad " 2.24 ! 10#4 rad " 2.24 ! 10#4 ! 57.3 ! 60 arcmin " 0.77 arcmin figure 5.10 the ﬁ eld of view of a telescope. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page190_img1.jpeg] 170 introduction to astronomy and cosmology thus the eye has a theoretical resolution of about 1 arcmin (1/60th of a degree). this image falls upon the retina where it is sampled by the rods and cones. if there were an insufﬁ cient number of these, the resolution would be compro- mised, but evolution has ensured that this is not a limiting factor! if we have a telescope with a magniﬁ cation of !60 it means that we could see detail about 1 arcsec across.
it is rare that the atmosphere will allow us to see detail ﬁ ner than this so one might say that !60 is all that you need. in fact, spreading out the image on the retina helps so a magniﬁ cation of !120 – !200 will usually let us see more detail. 5.6 image contrast in any telescope, some light will fall in areas of the image where it should not – turning black into dark grey. this light has been scattered by the surfaces of lenses and mirrors in the telescope and stray light can be reﬂ ected from the sides of the telescope tube. mirrors are worse than lenses in this respect and it is harder to efﬁ ciently bafﬂ e (to intercept stray light) a reﬂ ecting telescope than a refractor. so refractors tend to give the highest contrast images. many manufacturers can now provide mirrors with high reﬂ ectivity coatings. these will allow slightly fainter objects to be seen but, more importantly, by reducing the light scattered at mirror surfaces, they will have a marked effect on image contrast.