4.22 light years 208 introduction to astronomy and cosmology it is a star in the α centauri multiple star system and, not surprisingly, has been given the name proxima centauri. 6.3 proper motion in practice, as is often the case, things are not quite so simple. all stars in the galaxy are moving around the centre of the galaxy and, unless they are moving either directly away or towards us, will be slowly across the sky. this is called a star’s proper motion and is usually expressed in units of arcseconds a year. thus, if one measures a change in the position of a star when observed from either side of the earth’s orbit, one does not know whether this is caused by parallax, proper motion or a combination of both. to separate the two effects, one needs to observe the star again after a full year when the earth is back to its original position. any change in position observed over the full year will only be due to proper motion and so this component of the observed motion can be measured, so enabling the part due to parallax to be found. in practice, observations over several years will give the best results.
6.3.1 hipparcos and gaia we saw in the chapter 5 that observations from the ground are limited in posi- tional accuracy by turbulence in the atmosphere and, until recently, the number of stars whose parallax was known was limited to the few thousand out to dis- tances of about 40 pc (130 light years). in 1989, unencumbered by the atmo- sphere, a satellite called hipparcos (high precision parallax collecting satellite) was able to make observations for 3 years whose positions were accurate to about a milliarcsecond. it was thus able to accurately measure the distances and proper motions of 118 000 stars out to a distance of ∼90 pc (300 light years). the data collected by hipparcos contributed to the prediction of when comet shoemaker- levy 9 would collide with jupiter and showed that many billions of years ago, the galaxy swallowed a large group of stars. even so, hipparcos was only able to make measurements across ∼1% of the size of the galaxy.
a 5-year space mission called gaia is expected to be launched in 2011 which will have an accuracy that is 100 times better than that of hipparcos (figure 6.2). gaia will then be able to measure the positions, distances and proper motions of a billion stars – about 1% of all the stars in the galaxy! each of these stars and many other types of objects will be observed about 100 times, resulting in a record of their brightness and position over time. together with the unprec- edented accuracy of the astrometric measurements, this will lead to the discovery the properties of stars 209 of planets around other stars as outlined in chapter 4, asteroids in the inner solar system and icy bodies in the outer solar system. in the meantime, a method called spectroscopic parallax can be used to mea- sure distances across the galaxy. the discussion of this method will follow later in section 6.8 when stellar spectra have been covered. 6.4 the absolute magnitude scale if all stars were at a ﬁ xed distance, then their perceived relative brightness would be a true indication of their relative luminosity.
astronomers used this idea to set up an absolute magnitude scale in which the absolute magnitude of a star is equivalent to the apparent magnitude that it would appear to have if it lay at a distance of 10 pc. the absolute magnitudes of stars closer than 10 pc will thus be increased relative to their apparent magnitudes and those further away will be reduced. one problem in measuring the apparent magnitudes is the loss of light through absorption by dust – called extinction. this will underestimate the apparent lumi- nosity (giving a greater apparent magnitude) and the star will be given a smaller absolute magnitude than it should. this problem will be addressed later in the chapter. ignoring any extinction, if a star had an apparent magnitude of !20 at a distance of 100 pc, then at a distance of 10 pc it would appear 102 times brighter (the inverse square law). however, a factor of 100 is exactly 5 magnitudes differ- ence, so its absolute magnitude will be (!20 " 5) that is, 15th magnitude. figure 6.2 artist’s impression of the gaia spacecraft. image: esa.