5.13.2 submillimetre wavelengths submillimetre wavelengths lie between infrared light and radio waves on the wavelength scale. this largely comes from cold material in the universe, such as the clouds of gas and dust found between the stars that form the ‘interstellar medium’. it is out of this dust and gas that new stars are born, and into which stars disperse material as they explode at the end of their lives. figure 5.29 the eskimo planetary nebula imaged in visible light by the hubble space telescope (left) and in the infrared by the united kingdom infrared telescope (right). image: hubble space telescope institute, nasa and chris davis and tim carroll (joint astronomy centre). [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page214_img1.jpeg] 194 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the james clark maxwell telescope (jcmt) is the largest submillimetre telescope in the world having a 15-m diameter dish and is located on mauna kea, hawaii (figure 5.30).
(you may have noticed that it is pretty crowded up there!) as is the case for infrared, water vapour in the earth’s atmosphere absorbs submillimetre waves – which is why the high, dry site of mauna kea is one of the best places on the planet for astronomy. the jcmt is equipped with a detector array called scuba, the world’s most powerful submillimetre wave camera which takes pictures showing the faint heat radiation of interstellar dust grains. these ﬁ ne particles, like soot or sand, are at temperatures below !240°c. to be able to detect such faint radiation, scuba itself is kept within a jacket of liquid helium at a temperature of less than 1/10th of a degree above absolute zero! the jcmt also has ‘heterodyne receivers’ which detect light from gas molecules in space; their submillimetre radiation tell us about the temperature, density, and motion of the gas. in the nearby massive star formation region, the orion nebula, scuba’s maps have revealed bright knots where stars are being born and has shown a complex region of shells, ﬁ laments, and clouds at the centre of our galaxy hidden in visible light by intervening dust.
scuba can also observe galaxies, enshrouded in dust, more than 10 billion light years away and give information about star birth in the early universe. figure 5.30 the james clark maxwell telescope. image: science and technology facilities council. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page215_img1.jpeg] observing the universe 195 5.13.3 the spitzer space telescope at wavelengths between 3 µm and 180 µm, most of this infrared radiation is blocked by the earth’s atmosphere and cannot be observed from the ground so nasa has launched the spitzer space telescope which has a 0.85-m telescope and three cryogenically cooled science instruments. spitzer is the largest infrared telescope ever launched into space and, like scuba in the jcmt, the telescope must be cooled to near absolute zero so that it can observe infrared signals from space without interference from the telescope’s own heat.
to protect the telescope from the heat of the sun and infrared radiation from the earth, spitzer carries a solar shield and its orbit, trailing that of the earth, places spitzer far enough away from the earth to allow the telescope to cool rapidly without having to carry large amounts of cryogen (coolant). 5.13.4 ultraviolet, x-ray and gamma-ray observatories to observe at these very short wavelengths, the telescopes have to be in space and nasa has launched two space observatories, the compton gamma-ray observatory and the chandra x-ray observatory, to observe at the shortest wavelengths, whilst the hst can observe at ultraviolet wavelengths, ultraviolet there are currently no dedicated ultraviolet observatories in orbit, but the hst carries out signiﬁ cant observing at ultraviolet wavelengths, but it has a fairly small ﬁ eld of view. from 1978 until september 1996, the international ultraviolet explorer (iue) was operating to observe ultraviolet radiation. there have, however, been some ultraviolet space missions where a set of three wide ﬁ eld telescopes, called astro, were carried into orbit in the bay of the space shuttle.