he described the planet as having ‘ears’ and composed of three bodies which almost touched each other with that at the centre about three times the size of the outer two whose orientation was ﬁ xed. he became even more per- plexed when 2 years later the outer two bodies had gone. ‘has saturn swallowed his children?’ he wondered. he became further confused when they reappeared in 1613. in 1655 christiaan huygens observed saturn with a far superior tele- scope and suggested that saturn was surrounded by a ring system. he wrote: ‘saturn is surrounded by a thin, ﬂ at, ring, nowhere touching, inclined to the ecliptic’. as telescopes improved, more details could be seen and, in 1675, giovanni domenico cassini observed that saturn’s ring system was composed of a num- ber of smaller rings separated by gaps the largest of which has become known as ‘ cassini’s division’. in the mid 1800s, james clerk maxwell showed that a solid ring could not be stable and would break apart so that the ring system must be 114 introduction to astronomy and cosmology made up of myriads of particles individually orbiting saturn.
this would imply that different annuli of the rings would be moving at different speeds around saturn and this was proved when james keeler of the lick observatory made spectroscopic studies of the ring system in 1895. there is no doubt that, due to its ring system, saturn is the most beautiful object in the solar system that can be observed with a small telescope (figure 3.19). the key to understanding galileo’s confusion lies in huygens’s description that the ring system was inclined to the ecliptic due to saturn’s axial tilt. assume that saturn’s north pole was, at some point in its orbit, tilted closest to the sun. close to the sun we, on earth, would see much of the northern hemisphere and the rings at their most open. just under 15 years later, saturn will be on the opposite side of its orbit and the north pole would be tilted away from the sun. we would then see the southern hemisphere best and the rings would also be wide open. half way in between these extremes we see the rings edge-on and, just as galileo observed, they effectively disappear. hence, the earth will lay in the ring plane twice every orbit, about once every15 years.
it is not surprising that the rings effectively disappear as it is thought that they are less than 1 km in thickness! the ring particles range in size from dust par- ticles up to boulders a few metres in size and are largely composed of water ice (∼93%) along with amorphous carbon (∼7%). three rings can be observed from earth that extend from 6630 to 120 700 km above saturn’s equator. the outer ring, a ring, has a signiﬁ cant gap within it, called enkes division, whilst cassini’s division separates the a from the middle b, or bright ring. two further rings have figure 3.19 saturn observed by the cassini spacecraft as saturn eclipsed the sun. the far side of saturn from the sun is partially lit by light reﬂ ected from the rings. image: ciclops, jpl, esa, nasa. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page135_img1.jpeg] our solar system 2 – the planets 115 been discovered more recently; within the c ring there is a very faint d ring, whilst outside the a ring is a very thin f ring.
the rings are thought to have been formed when a moon either came within the roche limit of the planet where tidal forces broke it apart, or was impacted by a large comet or asteroid to give the same result. (as a small body nears a massive one, the gravitational force on the nearer side of the body exceeds that on the far side. there is thus a differential force across the body which tends to pull it apart. the roche limit is the distance from a planet at which this force would break up a typical small body.) the structure we see within the rings is due to the cumulative effect of the gravitational pull of saturn’s many moons. where a moon has a period which is a simple multiple of that of particles at a certain (nearer) distance to the centre of saturn, a ‘resonance’ occurs which clears particles from that part of the ring system. in this way, the moon mimas clears particles from the cassini division. titan titan is the largest moon of saturn and the only the moon in the solar system known to have a dense atmosphere. it is also the only object other than earth for which there is evidence of surface liquids, in the form of hydrocarbon lakes, in the satellite’s polar regions.