from the analysis of the solar spectrum it is possible to estimate the composition of the majority of the sun’s interior as the outer layers are ‘mixed’ by convec- tive currents as will be described later. the composition is about 71% by mass of hydrogen (91.2% in number of atoms), 27.1% by mass of helium (8.7% in number of atoms), oxygen makes up 0.97% (0.078% in number of atoms), and carbon 0.40% (0.043% in number of atoms). the small remainder then comprises all the other atoms detected in the sun’s spectrum. in the core there will be less hydrogen and more helium due to the nuclear fusion processes to be described below. 2.3 nuclear fusion up to the late 1800s, scientists could not understand how the sun could create so much light and heat. if the sun had been entirely made of something like coal (along with the oxygen it would need to burn) it would burn itself up in about a thousand years! since the sun had been providing heat and light for our solar system 1 – the sun 51 at least several thousand years a chemical source of the sun’s energy was clearly impossible.
around 1870, hermann von helmholtz realised that if the sun was contracting in size, energy, derived from potential energy, could be released. he knew, from the derivations given above, the mass and size of the sun and also knew how much energy the sun is continuously cre- ating and sending out into space. he calculated how much the sun would have to reduce in size to provide its observed output, and deduced the sun would be able to sustain its energy output for around 20 million years. in the late 1800s people were happy to assume that the solar system was less than 20 million years old, so his idea was almost universally accepted as the likely way that the sun creates its energy. (note: jupiter is radiating into space almost twice as much energy as it receives from the sun – the excess comes because jupiter is slowly contracting in size and so potential energy is being converted into heat.) however, during the late 1800s, geologists established that many earth rocks and the fossils within them are deﬁ nitely millions of years old, so helmholtz must have been wrong. in 1905, einstein published the famous e !
mc2 equation as part of his special theory of relativity. one could thus surmise that, as the veloc- ity of light, c, is very large, a tiny amount of mass (m) might be converted into an enormous amount of energy (e). by around 1925, physicists had determined the mass of a proton (a hydrogen nucleus) and had also determined that an alpha particle (a helium nucleus) has a mass slightly less than that of four protons. they realised that four hydrogen nuclei might be able to ‘fuse’ together into a helium nucleus (called fusion) and the mass that apparently disappears could be converted into energy. this is difﬁ cult! since the hydrogen nuclei are each positively charged pro- tons, they repel each other. in order to overcome this mutual repulsion, the protons must be moving toward each other nearly at the speed of light – and even then quantum mechanical tunnelling must be invoked. they can only do this if it is very hot – of the order of 10 million k.
due to the great mass of the sun, the pressure at its centre (called its core) must be very high to oppose the mass of the overlaying layers that form the greater part of the sun and calcu- lations show that the core would reach and exceed the required temperature. thus the source of the sun’s energy is a nuclear fusion reactor within the core of the sun. as the dust and gas that made up our sun collapsed under gravity, the temperature at the centre increased and the protons began to move faster. when the temperature exceeded ∼10 million k, the protons’ kinetic energy became sufﬁ cient for two protons on a collision course to get sufﬁ ciently close to allow an effect called quantum mechanical tunnelling to come into play. this allows one of them to overcome the potential barrier due to the electrostatic force between them. 52 introduction to astronomy and cosmology in quantum theory, particles, such as the two protons approaching each other, can be described by wave functions, which represent the probability of ﬁ nding a particle in a certain location.