image: nasa/cxc/e.o’sullivan et al. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page339_img1.jpeg] cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 319 9.12.2 how much non-baryonic dark matter is there? there are several ways of estimating the amount of dark matter. one of the most direct is based on the detailed analysis of the ﬂ uctuations in the cmb. the percent- age of dark matter has an observable effect, and the best ﬁ t to current observations corresponds to dark matter making up ∼23% of the total mass/energy content of the universe. other observations support this result. this then leaves two further questions: what is dark matter and what provides the remaining 73% of the total mass/energy content? 9.12.3 what is dark matter? the honest answer is that we do not really know. the standard model of particle physics does not predict its existence and so extensions to the standard theory (which have yet to be proven) have to be used to predict what it might be and suggest how it might be detected.
dark matter can be split into two possible components: hot dark matter would be made up of very light particles moving close to the speed of light (hence hot) whilst cold dark matter would comprise relatively massive particles moving more slowly. simulations that try to model the evolution of structure in the universe – the distri- bution of the clusters and superclusters of galaxies – require that most of the dark matter is ‘cold’ but astronomers do believe that there is a small component of hot dark matter in the form of neutrinos. there are vast numbers of neutrinos in the universe but they were long thought to have no mass. however, recent observa- tions attempting to solve the solar neutrino problem discussed earlier, show that neutrinos can oscillate between three types (electron, tau and muon). this implies figure 9.12 the abell 2218 cluster imaged by the hubble space telescope. image: nasa, a. fruchter and the ero team, stsci. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page340_img1.jpeg] 320 introduction to astronomy and cosmology that they must have some mass but current estimates put this at less than one- millionth of the mass of the electron.
as a result they would only make a small contribution to the total amount of dark matter – agreeing with the simulations. a further conﬁ rmation of the fact that hot dark matter is not dominant is that, if it were, the small scale ﬂ uctuations that we see in the wmap data would have been ‘smoothed’ out and the observed cmb structure would have shown far less detail. axions one possible candidate for cold dark matter is a light neutral axion whose existence was predicted by the peccei–quinn theory in 1977. there would be of order 10 trillion in every cubic centimetre! if axions exist they could theoretically change into photons (and vice versa) in the presence of a strong magnetic ﬁ eld. one possible test would be to attempt to pass light through a wall. a beam of light is passed through a magnetic ﬁ eld cavity adjacent to a light barrier. a photon might rarely convert into an axion which could easily pass through the wall where it would pass through a second cavity where (again with an incredibly low probability) it might convert back into a photon!
another experiment at the lawrence livermore laboratory is searching for microwave photons within a tuned cavity that might result from an axion decay, whilst in italy polarized light is being passed back and forth millions of times through a 5 t ﬁ eld. if axions exist, photons could interact with the ﬁ eld and become axions; causing a very small anomalous rotation of the plane of polariza- tion. the most recent results do indicate the existence of axions with a mass of ∼3 times that of the electron, but this has to be conﬁ rmed and there may well be other causes for the observed effect on the light. wimps an extension to the standard model of particle physics, called ‘super symmetry’, suggests that wimps (weakly interacting massive particles) might be a major constituent of cold dark matter. a leading candidate is the neutralino – the light- est neutral super symmetric particle. billions of wimps could be passing through us each second! very occasionally they will interact with the nucleus of an atom making it recoil – rather like the impact of a moving billiard ball with a stationary one. in principle, but with very great difﬁ culty, these interactions can be detected.