they appear to be made of dust with the main ring probably made of material ejected from the satellites adrastea and metis as a result of figure 3.16 jupiter as imaged by the hubble space telescope showing the equatorial bands and the great red spot below and to the left of which is a new feature nicknamed ‘red spot junior’. image: nasa, esa, a. simon-miller (goddard space flight centre), i. de pater, m. wong (uc berkeley). [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page130_img1.jpeg] 110 introduction to astronomy and cosmology meteorite impact. jupiter’s strong gravitational pull prevents the material falling back onto their surfaces and they gradually move towards jupiter. it is thought that the two components of the gossamer ring are produced in similar fashion by the moons thebe and amalthea. the comet shoemaker-levy 9 impact perhaps the most exciting event in recent jovian history was when the fragments of comet shoemaker-levy 9 impacted on its surface in july 1994 (figure 3.17).
it is thought that jupiter had captured the comet in the late 1960s or early 1970s so it had become a temporary satellite of jupiter orbiting it once every 2 years or so. it appears that the comet had passed within 40 000 km of jupiter’s surface on july 7, 1992. this distance is within what is called the roche limit of the planet within which the gravitational forces acting on the comet were able to break it up into a number of fragments. if a body has a particular size, the force of gravity acting on those parts of the body furthest from the centre of mass of a nearby planet will be less than that on the nearer parts. a differential ‘tidal’ force thus acts across the body. if this force is greater than the gravitational forces keeping the body whole, the body will break up into smaller parts. as jupiter is very mas- sive, its tidal forces are very great and also have a signiﬁ cant effect on jupiter’s innermost galilean moon, io.
the comet was discovered on the night of march 24, 1993 by carolyn and eugene shoemaker and david levy in a photograph taken with the 0.4 m schmidt figure 3.17 the impact sites where fragments of the comet shoemaker-levy 9 impacted on the surface of jupiter. image: hubble space telescope, space telescope science institute, nasa. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page131_img1.jpeg] our solar system 2 – the planets 111 telescope at the mount palomar observatory in california. (they were conducting a programme of observations designed to uncover neos.) high resolution images, such as that made by the hubble space telescope, showed a number of fragments (labelled a to w) which ranged in size from a few hundred metres up to 2 km. it is thought that the initial diameter of the comet would have been about 5 km. as the orbits of the fragments were reﬁ ned, it became apparent that they were very likely to impact on the surface of jupiter the following year with the individual impacts to be spread out over just under a week.
further observations showed that the impact sites would lie just over jupiter’s limb, so would not be directly visible from earth. however, in the same way that a nuclear explosion creates a giant mushroom cloud that rises up into the atmosphere, the hubble space telescope was trained on the limb in the hope of observing a ﬁ reball above the impact site. the spacecraft galileo, en route to jupiter, was in a position to image the impact site and on july 16, 1994 detected a ﬁ reball which had a peak temperature of 24 000 k. observations from earth soon detected the plume from the ﬁ reball that reached over 3000 km above the jovian atmosphere. the material thrown up into space soon fell back to the surface and formed dark spots, similar in size to the earth, on the surface. they were easily visible with a small telescope and the author will never forget his ﬁ rst sight of the pair of giant spots produced by the f and g fragments. the latter produced a spot some 12 000 km across and is thought to have released the equivalent of 6 000 000 t of tnt!