far more com- mon are elliptical galaxies containing perhaps a few million solar masses within a volume a few thousand light years across. one interesting fact is that ellipsoidal galaxies do not appear to have any young stars within them so star formation appears to have ceased – all the gas having been used up to form stars in the past. photographs of m31, the andromeda nebula, show its two companion elliptical galaxies. the nearer, more spherical in appearance, is of type e2, whilst the more distant is of type e5. elliptical galaxies account for about one-third of all galaxies in the universe. 8.2.2 spiral galaxies like our own galaxy, these have a ﬂ attened spiral structure. the ﬁ rst observation of the spiral arms in a galaxy was made by the third earl of rosse. during the 1840s he designed and had built the mirrors, tube and mountings for a 72 in. reﬂ ecting telescope which for three-quarters of a century was the largest optical telescope in the world. with this instrument, situated at birr castle in ireland, lord rosse made some beautiful drawings of astronomical objects.
perhaps the most notable was that, shown in figure 8.14, of an object which was the 51st to figure 8.14 m51, the whirlpool galaxy, as drawn by the third earl of rosse using the 72 in. telescope at birr castle in county oﬀ aly, ireland. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page298_img1.jpeg] 278 introduction to astronomy and cosmology be listed in messier’s catalogue and known as the ‘whirlpool galaxy’. it was the ﬁ rst drawing to show the spiral arms of a galaxy and bears excellent comparison with modern day photographic images (figure 8.15). (the galaxy is interacting with a second galaxy, ngc 5195; shown in the lower left of figure 8.14.) spiral galaxies make up the majority of the brighter galaxies. hubble classiﬁ ed them ﬁ rst into four types: s0, sa, sb and sc. s0 galaxies, often called ‘lenticular’ galaxies, have a very large nucleus with hardly visible, very tightly wound, spi- ral arms.
as one moves towards type sc, the nucleus becomes relatively smaller and the arms more open. in many galaxies the spiral arms appear to extend from either end of a central bar. these are called ‘barred spirals’ and are denoted sba, sbb and sbc. our own milky way galaxy was thought to be a sb or sc galaxy but there is now some evidence that it has a bar making it an sbb or sbc galaxy. type s0 galaxies, like elliptical galaxies, do not appear to have star form- ing regions, but as one moves towards the type sc or sbc, which contain more gas, star forming regions and the resulting young o and b type stars are seen in abundance. colour images show a signiﬁ cant colour contrast between the central core and the spiral arms. the core has a yellow-orange tint, whilst the spiral arms are blu- ish. the colour of the core indicates that the stars there are old, as yellow, orange and red stars live for long periods of time. in contrast, the spiral arms contain figure 8.15 hubble space telescope image of m51. image: nasa, esa, s.
beckwith (stsci), and the hubble heritage team (stsci/aura). [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page299_img1.jpeg] galaxies and the large scale structure of the universe 279 many young blue stars. though in percentage terms they are relatively rare they outshine stars like our sun by thousands of times so their light tends to dominate the colour of the spiral arms. though the centre of the galaxy m81, shown in figure 8.16, is somewhat overexposed, the colour differences can be seen in the image as the colours have been slightly enhanced. 8.2.3 evidence for an unseen component in spiral galaxies – dark matter in the 1970s a problem related to the dynamics of galaxies came to light. vera rubin observed the light from hii regions (ionized clouds of hydrogen such as the orion nebula) in a number of spiral galaxies. these hii regions move with the stars and other visible matter in the galaxies but, as they are very bright, are easier to observe than other visible matter. hii regions emit the deep red hydro- gen alpha (h-alpha) spectral line.