if one looks forwards in time to ∼100 billion years, any observers in existence within this ‘galaxy’ would see a totally empty universe! the expansion of space will have carried all other galaxies beyond our horizon – the edge of the visible universe. it would be virtually impossible for such observers to learn about the evolution of the universe for a number of reasons including the fact that the peak of the energy spectrum of the cmb will have red shifted down to ∼1 m. a uniform radio background at this wavelength could, in principle, be detected, but its inten- sity will have reduced by 12 orders of magnitude so that it would be virtually impossible to detect! from theoretical studies of stellar evolution and how the relative abundances of the elements change with time (for example, the amount of hydrogen is reduc- ing and that of helium increasing as a result of nucleosynthesis in stars) it might well be possible to estimate the age of the galaxy, but it would be not be possible to infer that its origin involved a big bang. it would be tough being an astronomer!
we happen to live at the only time in the history of the universe when the mag- nitude of dark energy and dark matter are comparable and also when the cmb is easily observable; this enables us to infer the existence of dark energy, the way in which the universe has evolved since the big bang and its future in a runaway expansion (figure 9.15). any observers present when the universe was young would not have been able to infer the presence of dark energy as, at that time, it would have had virtually no effect on the expansion rate. those in the far future will not be able to tell that they live in an expanding universe at all, and not be able to infer the existence of dark energy either! as the longest lived stars come to the end of their lives, the evidence that lies at the heart of out current understanding of the origin and evolution of the universe will have disappeared. cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 333 it is interesting to note that we live in what is perhaps the very best time in which to explore the mysteries of the universe. as lawrence m. krauss and robert j.
scherrer have stated: ‘we live in a very special time in the evolution of the universe: the time when we can observationally verify that we live in a very special time in the evolution of the universe!’ this is a wonderful time at which to study astronomy. i trust that this book might have helped you on your way. figure 9.15 a time-line of the universe. image: nasa/wmap science team.