figure 3.4 shows that the earth will 82 introduction to astronomy and cosmology intercept this radiation over an area given by the earth’s cross-section. if sc is the value of the solar constant, then the total energy that will fall on the earth is given by: πr2sc if we assume that the planet acts as a black body, then the energy emitted by it is given by the stefan–boltzmann law and equals: 4πr2σt 4 in equilibrium, these energies must be equal: πr2sc ! 4πr2σt 4 so sc ! 4σt 4 t ! (sc/4σ)1/4 ! [1368/(4 " 5.7 " 10#8)]1/4 ! 278 k this is not far off the actual average surface temperature, but should it be? the earth is, on average, about 50% cloud covered and absorbs only ∼77% of the incident solar radiation from the sun. taking this into account by reducing the incident energy by 0.77, tearth would only be ∼260 k.
however, the greenhouse effect produced by the carbon dioxide, methane and water vapour in the atmo- sphere prevents the earth radiating away as much energy as would a perfect black body, so increasing the earth’s temperature. the two effects roughly cancel out giving us an average temperature for tearth of ∼288 k. it is worth pointing out that without the greenhouse gases in our atmosphere our planet would be uninhabitable. figure 3.4 the earth’s eﬀ ective area for absorption of solar energy. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page103_img1.jpeg] our solar system 2 – the planets 83 greenhouse gases absorb infrared radiation emitted by the earth and then re-emit it in random directions – so much of the infrared radiation will thus be directed back at the earth! 3.3.5 global warming the major constituents of the atmosphere, nitrogen, n2, and oxygen, o2, are not greenhouse gases. this is because diatomic molecules such as these nei- ther absorb nor emit infrared radiation. carbon dioxide is the main greenhouse gas in the atmosphere.
over aeons of time its percentage in the atmosphere has remained stable but, unfortunately, the burning of fossil fuels (which have stored carbon within them) is rapidly increasing the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and this is almost certainly a major contribution to the fact that our earth’s temperature is increasing – termed global warming or climate change. water vapour is a naturally occurring greenhouse gas and actually accounts for the largest percentage of the greenhouse effect, somewhere between 36% and 66%. the amount of water vapour in the air from locality to locality is very vari- able but overall, human activity does not directly affect water vapour concentra- tions (except near irrigated ﬁ elds for example) and its effects on the earth’s climate are remaining stable. however, the amounts of two further greenhouse gases are now also increasing: (1) methane is 20 times more efﬁ cient at retaining heat than carbon dioxide and we are adding up to 500 million t of methane into the atmosphere per year from livestock, coal mining, drilling for oil and natural gas, rice cultivation, and garbage decaying in landﬁ lls.
(2) each year, 7–13 million t of nitrous oxide is added to the atmosphere from the use of nitrogen based fertilizers, the disposing of human and animal waste in sewage treatment plants and automobile exhausts. an increase in the earth’s average temperature of more than 2 degrees could begin to have very harmful consequences for the human race, which explains why the problem is being treated so seriously. 3.3.6 albedo as the example of the earth has shown, the actual temperature of a planet is affected by how much of the sun’s incident energy is reﬂ ected back into space – called the albedo of a planet – and the effects of greenhouse gases, if any. 84 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the earth has an albedo of ∼0.37, meaning that it reﬂ ects ∼37% of the sun’s energy and so will absorb 63%. venus has an albedo of ∼0.7 (published values vary from 0.65 to 0.84) so that it only absorbs 30% of the incident solar energy, but its carbon dioxide atmosphere is so thick that its surface temperature is raised signiﬁ cantly.