[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page290_img1.jpeg] 270 introduction to astronomy and cosmology centre of the galaxy, and so deduced that our sun was ∼30 000 light years distant from it and the diameter was about 100 000 light years across. figure 8.7 shows a cross-section of the galaxy with the positions of the globular clusters observed by shapley. figure 8.6 the eagle nebula (a) and horsehead nebula (b). images: nasa, jeﬀ hester, and paul scowen (arizona state university) (a) and nigel sharp (noao), kpno, aura, nsf (b). figure 8.7 the distribution of globular clusters as observed by harlow shapley.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page291_img1.jpeg] [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page291_img2.jpeg] galaxies and the large scale structure of the universe 271 we now believe that the sun is 27.7 thousand years from the galactic cen- tre and, using spectroscopic measurements to observe its motion relative to the globular clusters, we can calculate that the sun is moving around the centre of the galaxy at about 220 km s!1, taking ∼230 million years to travel once around it. it appears that the central parts of the galaxy rotate like a solid body so that the rotation speed increases as one moves out from the centre. measurements of the speed at which stars and gas rotate around the centre of the galaxy as a function of distance produce what is called the ‘galactic rotation curve’. but what of its structure? neutral hydrogen (hi) emits a radio spectral line with a wavelength of 21 cm. radio observations of this line along the plane of the milky way show that the gas in the disc is not uniformly dense but is con- centrated into clouds whose velocity away from or towards us can be determined using the doppler shift in its observed wavelength.
these data can be used to plot out the positions of the gas clouds and when this is done a pattern of spiral arms emerges – indicating that we live in a typical spiral galaxy thought to be quite similar to the nearby andromeda galaxy. 8.1.5 observations of the hydrogen line let us consider this in more detail. a neutral hydrogen atom consists of a proton and an electron. as well as their motion in orbit around each other, the proton and electron also have a property called spin. this is actually a quantum mechanical concept, but is analogous to the spin of the earth and the sun about their rotation axes. again, using this analogy, the spin may be clockwise or anticlockwise. thus their two spins may be oriented in either the same direction or in opposite direc- tions. in a magnetic ﬁ eld (as exists in the galaxy) the state in which the spins of the electron and proton are aligned in the same direction has slightly more energy than one where the spins of the electron and proton are in opposite directions.
very rarely (with a probability of 2.9 " 10!15 s!1) a single isolated atom of neutral hydrogen will undergo a transition between the two states and emit a radio spec- tral line at a frequency of 1420.40575 mhz. this frequency has a wavelength of ∼21 cm so that it is often called the 21-cm line. a single hydrogen atom will only make such a transition in a timescale of order 10 million years but, as there are a very large number of neutral hydrogen atoms in the ism, it can be easily observed by radio telescopes. this radio spectral line was ﬁ rst detected by professor edward purcell and his graduate student, harold ewen, at harvard university in 1951 using a simple horn antenna. let us consider what we would see if our galaxy had a number of spiral arms. as well as delineating concentrations of stars and dust, they will also contain a higher concentration of hydrogen gas.