then, in 2006, the hubble space telescope made a survey of 180 000 stars up to 26 000 light-years away towards the central bulge of our galaxy. the survey discovered 16 candidate extra-solar planets of which three have since been conﬁ rmed. such conﬁ rmation is required as the technique has a high rate of false detections. if all 16 were conﬁ rmed, it would imply that there would be of order 6000 million jupiter sized planets in the galaxy. five of the newly discovered planets were found to orbit their sun with periods of #1 day. the candidate with the shortest period – just 10 h – is only 1.2 million km from its relatively small, red dwarf sun and has an estimated surface temperature of 1400 k! it must be at least 1.6 times the mass of jupiter in order to prevent the tidal forces from the star splitting the planet apart (figure 4.6). apart from the high rate of false detections the transit method has the problem that transits can only be observed when the planet’s orbit is nearly edge on.
about 10% of planets in close orbits would show transits, but the fraction is far smaller for planets with large orbits as the alignment has to be more precise – only ∼0.5% figure 4.5 the eﬀ ect of a planetary transit on the brightness of a star. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page164_img1.jpeg] 144 introduction to astronomy and cosmology of earth-like planets in orbit around stars similar to our sun would cause transits. two space missions called kepler and corot will have very large ﬁ eld of views, enabling them to continuously monitor many stars. the 95 megapixel ccd array used with the 0.95 m kepler telescope will monitor more than 100 000 stars with very high precision during an initial 3.5 year observing period. it is hoped that kepler and corot will, for the ﬁ rst time, enable the detection of a signiﬁ cant number of earth sized planets. the transit method does have two signiﬁ cant advantages.
the ﬁ rst is that, as a planet will take some time to fully cover its star, the size of the planet can be deter- mined from the light curve. when combined with the planet’s mass, determined by the radial velocity method, the density of the planet can be determined and so we can learn about its physical structure. the second advantage is that it is possible to study the atmosphere of a planet. when the planet transits the star, light from the star passes through the atmosphere of the planet. by carefully studying the star’s spectrum during the transit, absorp- tion lines will appear that relate to elements in the planetary atmosphere. the extra-solar planet hd 209458b, provisionally nicknamed osiris, was the ﬁ rst planet observed transiting its sun (figure 4.7). observations by the hubble space telescope ﬁ rst discovered a tail of evaporating hydrogen which may, in time, completely strip the planet of gas leaving a ‘dead’ rocky core. more recent hubble space telescope observations have shown that the planet is surrounded figure 4.6 an artist’s impression of a transiting exoplanet. image: esa – c. carreau.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page165_img1.jpeg] extra-solar planets 145 by an extended envelope of oxygen and carbon believed to be in the shape of a rugby ball. these heavier atoms are caught up in the ﬂ ow of the escaping atmo- spheric atomic hydrogen and rise from the lower atmosphere rather like dust in a whirlwind. 4.3 gravitational microlensing the detection of earth-mass planets by the transit method still (in 2007) lies in the future, but there is a third method which has the potential to achieve this now – and has already detected a 5 earth-mass planet. in chapter 2 we saw how einstein’s general theory of relativity was proven by the observed movement of star’s positions due to the curvature of space close to the sun. this effect gives rise to what is called gravitational lensing, speciﬁ cally gravitational microlensing as the effects are on a very small scale.