below about 700 k (430°c) black bodies produce very little radiation at visible wavelengths and appear black to our eyes – though we could sense the infrared radiation emitted at temperatures somewhat below this. above this temperature figure 2.3 black body radiation curves. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page67_img1.jpeg] our solar system 1 – the sun 47 black bodies will emit enough radiation at visible wavelengths for us to see a colour which passes through red, orange, yellow, and white to blue as the temperature increases. as the temperature increases further the peak wavelength moves into the ultraviolet, but there is still considerable energy in the blue part of the spec- trum so that the object appears blue. the problem of calculating the form of the spectral curve for black body radiation was ﬁ nally solved in 1901 by max planck and is known as planck’s law of black body radiation. planck had found a mathematical formula that ﬁ tted the experimental data, but to ﬁ nd a physical interpretation for this formula he had to invoke the principle of quantization: ‘photons’ within the cavity could only have certain allowed energies.
in 1905, einstein proposed that electromagnetic radiation was quantized in order to explain the photoelectric effect and was later awarded the nobel prize in physics for this insight. there are two laws which relate to electromagnetic radiation which follows a black body spectrum. wien’s law the ﬁ rst law is wien’s displacement law which states that the wavelength at which the spectrum peaks is inversely proportional to the surface temperature. (in other words, the greater the temperature, the shorter the peak wavelength.) the peak wavelength, λmax, is thus given by a constant, wien’s constant, divided by the temperature. it value is 2.897 ! 10"3 m k so with λ in metres and t in kelvin: λmax # 2.897 ! 10"3/t or, with λ in nanometres: λmax # 2.897 ! 106/t wien’s law enables the temperature of inaccessible objects, such as a lava ﬂ ow or the interior of a blast furnace (an excellent black body as it really is a cavity), to be measured and, as we will see, allows us to estimate the surface temperature of the sun.
stefan–boltzmann law the second law relating to black body radiation is called the stefan–boltzmann law, which is often known simply as stefan’s law. it was discovered experimentally by jožef stefan in 1879 and derived theoretically from thermodynamic principles 48 introduction to astronomy and cosmology by ludwig boltzmann in 1884. the law states that the total energy radiated per unit surface area of a black body per unit time is directly proportional to the fourth power of the black body’s absolute temperature. the constant of proportionality, σ, is called the stefan–boltzmann constant or stefan’s constant, and has the value: σ ! 5.67 " 10#8 wm#2k#4 thus the emitted power across the electromagnetic spectrum of a body of surface area a and temperature t is given by: e ! σat 4 w real objects do not, in general, act as perfect black bodies but in the majority of astronomical applications we ﬁ rst assume that the object (such as a star or a planet) does act as a black body and then make a suitable correction if necessary.
an interesting astronomical result that came out of the radiation laws was related to the planet mercury. it was long thought that mercury’s rotation period was the same at its orbital period of 88 days. if this was the case, one face would be locked to the sun (like the moon to the earth) and would thus be very hot, but the face away from the sun would be very cold – close to absolute zero. however, observations made at wavelengths of 11.3 and 1.9 cm in the radio part of the spectrum indicated that the supposed dark side surface temperature must be in the region of 250 k. this observation was later conﬁ rmed when radar observations showed that mercury’s rotation period was not 87.97 days, but 68.65 days, so all parts of the surface do, at some time, face the sun. both the peak wavelength and total power output of a black body are related to its surface temperature. assuming that the sun’s visible surface acts as a black body, this then gives us two ways of estimating its surface temperature. the peak of the visible spectrum is at a wavelength of ∼500 nm (0.5 " 10#6 m).