they took the pigeons many miles away and released them but, as pigeons do, they returned cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 311 and had to be removed by a local pigeon expert. during their time within the horn antenna, the pigeons had covered much of the interior with what, in their letter to the journal nature, was called ‘a white dielectric substance’ – we might call it ‘guano’. this was cleaned out, but having removed both the pigeons and the guano there was no substantial difference. the excess noise remained the same wherever they pointed the telescope – it came equally from all parts of the sky. an astronomer, bernie burke, when told of the problem suggested that they contact robert dicke at princeton university. dicke had independently theorized that the universe should be ﬁ lled with radiation resulting from the big bang and was building a horn antenna on top of the physics department in order to detect it.
learning of penzias and wilson’s observations, dicke immediately realised that his group had been ‘scooped’ and told them that the excess noise was not caused within their horn antenna or receiver but that their observations agreed exactly with the predictions that the universe would be ﬁ lled with radiation left over from the big bang. dicke was soon able to conﬁ rm their result, and it was perhaps a little unfair that he did not share in the nobel prize. the average temperature of the cmb is 2.725 k. thirty years later cobe’s measurements were able to show that the cmb had the precise black body spectrum that would result from the big bang scenario. since then, it has been very difﬁ cult to refute the fact that there was a big bang. figure 9.6 arno penzias and robert wilson and the holmdel antenna. image: wikipedia commons. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page332_img1.jpeg] 312 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 9.8 inﬂ ation by the 1970s, problems with the standard big bang models had arisen.
observations had shown that the universe was very close to being ‘ﬂ at’, ω ∼1, and the big bang theory gives no particular reason why this should be so. any curvature that the universe has close to its origin tends to get enhanced as the universe ages – a slightly positively curved space becomes more and more so and vice versa. in fact, had not ω been in the range 0.999999999999999–1.000000000000001 just 1 s after its origin the universe could not be as it is now! this is incredibly ﬁ ne tuning, and there is nothing in the standard big bang theory to explain why this should be so. this is called the ﬂ atness problem. a second problem is known as the horizon problem. the universe appears to have exactly the same properties – speciﬁ cally the observed temperature of the cmb – in opposing directions. the cmb from one direction has taken nearly 14 000 million years to reach us, and the same from the opposing direction.
in the standard big bang models there has not been sufﬁ cient time to allow radiation to travel from one of these regions to the other – they cannot ‘know’ what each other’s temperature is, as this information cannot travel faster than the speed of light. so why are they at precisely the same temperature? these problems were addressed with the idea of inﬂ ation, ﬁ rst proposed by alan guth and reﬁ ned by others. in this scenario the whole of the visible universe would have initially been contained in a volume of order the size of a proton. some 10!35 s after the origin this volume of space began to expand exponentially and increased in size by a factor of order 1026 in a time of ∼10!32 s to the size of a sphere a metre or more in size (figure 9.7). this massive expansion of space would force the geometry of space to become ‘ﬂ at’, just as the surface of a balloon appears to become ﬂ atter and ﬂ atter as it expands. (hence one would naturally get a ‘ﬂ at’ universe.) figure 9.7 the inﬂ ationary epoch in the early universe.