[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page253_img1.jpeg] stellar evolution – the life and death of stars 233 with mass greater than ∼2 solar masses this process, proposed independently by carl von weizsäcker and hans bethe in 1938 and 1939, respectively, becomes dominant. it provides a very efﬁ cient way of converting hydrogen to helium so the hydrogen in more massive stars burns more quickly so increasing the energy output of the core. as the greater energy output of the stars must be balanced by radiation from their surface, the stars become bluer and have a greater lumi- nosity – as shown by their positions on the hertzsprung–russell diagram (h–r diagram). the reactions of the cno cycle are: 12c ! 1h → 13n ! γ 13n → 13c ! e! ! νe 13c ! 1h → 14n ! γ 14n ! 1h → 15o ! γ 15o → 15n ! e! ! νe 15n ! 1h → 12c !
4he the net result of the cycle is to fuse four protons into an alpha particle along with two positrons, two electron neutrinos (which carry some energy away from the star) and three gamma rays. the carbon acts as a catalyst and is regenerated. the two positrons annihilate electrons releasing energy in the form of gamma rays; each annihilation gives rise to two gamma rays. when the cno process reaches an equilibrium state, the reactions of each stage will proceed at the same rate. the slowest reaction within the cycle is that which converts 14n into 15o so, in order for this reaction to have an equal reac- tion rate, the number of nitrogen nuclei must be signiﬁ cantly larger than that of carbon or oxygen. thus, over time, the relative amount of nitrogen increases until equilibrium is established. whilst the total number of the carbon, nitrogen and oxygen nuclei is conserved, nitrogen nuclei become the most numerous, regard- less of the initial composition. this process produces essentially all of the nitrogen in the universe and thus has great signiﬁ cance for us as nitrogen is an essential element of all life-forms here on earth.
7.2.1 moving up the main sequence as the proton–proton or cno cycles convert hydrogen to helium in the core of the star, its mean molecular weight increases. the pressure of an ideal gas increases with the temperature of the gas, but decreases as the mean molecular weight of the gas rises. assuming (correctly) that the matter in the core acts like an ideal gas, in order for the pressure to remain sufﬁ cient to support the overlying layers of 234 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the star as the amount of helium increases, the core’s temperature must rise. the rate of, for example, the proton–proton chain is a function of the fourth power of the temperature, so that even though the percentage of hydrogen is reducing, the conversion rate of hydrogen to helium gradually increases whilst the star lies on the main sequence. this, of course, increases the energy output of the star, so its luminosity will increase and, in order to radiate more energy, so will its surface temperature. the combined result is that the star slowly moves up and to the left of the main sequence.
it is believed that, when formed, our sun was ∼30% less bright than at the present time and that over the next billion years its luminosity will increase by a further 10%. an obvious consequence is that our earth will eventually become too hot for life (as we know it) to exist on its surface. 7.2.2 the triple alpha process eventually, either by the proton–proton chain or the cno cycle, the core of the star will be converted into 4he. at this point nuclear fusion stops so that the pres- sure in the core that prevents gravitational collapse drops. the core thus reduces in size but, as it does so, its temperature will rise. finally, when the tempera- ture reaches ∼100 million k, a new reaction, known as the triple alpha process (3α), occurs. it is so-called because it involves three helium nuclei which are also known as alpha particles (figure 7.2). this is an extremely subtle process. the ﬁ rst obvious nuclear reaction that would occur in a core composed of helium is that two 4he nuclei fuse to form 8be.