[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page1_img1.jpeg] introduction to astronomy and cosmology ian morison university of manchester, uk a john wiley and sons, ltd., publication [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page2_img1.png] introduction to astronomy and cosmology introduction to astronomy and cosmology ian morison university of manchester, uk a john wiley and sons, ltd., publication [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page6_img1.png] this edition ﬁ rst published 2008 © 2008 john wiley & sons registered ofﬁ ce john wiley & sons ltd, the atrium, southern gate, chichester, west sussex, po19 8sq, united kingdom for details of our global editorial ofﬁ ces, for customer services and for information about how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com. the right of the author to be identiﬁ ed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the copyright, designs and patents act 1988. all rights reserved.
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the uk copyright, designs and patents act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher. wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books. designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. all brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respec- tive owners. the publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. this publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. it is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. if professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought. the publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and speciﬁ cally disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of ﬁ tness for a particular purpose.
this work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in render- ing professional services. the advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. in view of ongoing research, equipment modiﬁ cations, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant ﬂ ow of informa- tion relating to the use of experimental reagents, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each chemical, piece of equipment, reagent, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions. the fact that an organization or website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or website may provide or recommendations it may make. further, readers should be aware that internet websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. no warranty may be cre- ated or extended by any promotional statements for this work. neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
library of congress cataloging-in-publication data morison, ian, 1943– introduction to astronomy and cosmology / ian morison. p. cm. includes bibliographical references and index. isbn 978-0-470-03333-3 (cloth) — isbn 978-0-470-03334-0 (pbk. : alk.paper) 1. astronomy—textbooks. 2. cosmology—textbooks. i. title. qb43.3.m67 2008 520—dc22 2008029112 a catalogue record for this book is available from the british library. set in 8/10 pt photina by integra software services pvt. ltd. pondicherry, india. printed and bound in spain by grafos sa, barcelona to the memory of my father, archibald, who inspired my love of astronomy, to bernard lovell who made it possible for me to pursue that love and to my wife, judy, with love.