ε" → 2γ where ε! is a positron and πο is a neutral pi-meson or pion. figure 7.10 supernova 1987a in the large magellanic cloud. image: european southern observatory. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page269_img1.jpeg] stellar evolution – the life and death of stars 249 the proton decays into a positron and neutral pion which then immediately decays into two gamma rays. the positron will annihilate with an electron to form two more gamma rays. to this end, a number of detectors were built in the 1980s including that at the kamioka underground observatory located 1000 m below ground in japan. to provide the protons, 3000 tons of pure water was contained in a cylinder 16 m tall and 15.6 m in diameter. the cylinder was surrounded by 1000 photomulti- plier tubes attached to its inner surface which would be able to detect the gamma rays produced in the proton decay. it came into operation in 1983 and was given greater sensitivity in 1985.
to date, even with a new detector containing 50 000 tons of water, no convincing proton decays have been detected and later versions of gut suggest that the decay half-life might be nearer to 1035 years. however, what is critically important was that the detector, which came into full operation at the end of 1986 after its upgrade in 1985, could also detect neutrinos. relativity states that no particle can travel at the speed of light in a vacuum. however, in dense media, like water, light travels at lower speeds. it is thus possible for a particle to travel through water faster than the speed of light. if the particle is charged, it will emit light radiation called cherenkov radiation. the process is analogous to the formation of a sonic boom when an airplane exceeds the speed of sound. neutrino interactions with the electrons in the water can transfer almost all the neutrino momentum to an electron which then moves at relativistic speeds in the same direction. the relativistic electron produces cherenkov radiation which can be detected by the photomultiplier tubes around the tank. the expanding light cone will trigger a ring of photomultiplier tubes whose position gives an indication of the direction from which the neutrino has travelled.
this makes it more than just a detector – it forms a very crude telescope! when supernova 1987a was seen to explode just a few months later (this being the serendipitous timing referred to earlier) the kamiokande experiment detected 11 neutrinos within the space of 15 s. a similar facility in ohio detected a further 8 neutrinos within just 6 s and a detector in russia recorded a burst of 5 neutrinos within 5 s. these 24 neutrinos are the only ones ever to have been detected from a supernova explosion. perhaps surprisingly, the neutrinos were detected some 3 h before the supernova was detected optically. this is not because they had trav- elled faster than light! they, of course, travelled out directly from the collapsing core of the star, whereas the visible light was not emitted until later when the shock wave reached the surface of the star. the detection of those 24 neutrinos was perfect conﬁ rmation of the theoretical models that had been developed for the core collapse of a massive star and consistent with theoretical prediction that ∼1058 neutrinos would be produced in such an event.
the kamiokande observa- tions also allowed an upper limit to be placed on the neutrino mass. if one assumes 250 introduction to astronomy and cosmology that the neutrinos began their trip somewhat ahead of the light from the super- nova and given the fact that they arrived before the light having travelled through space for ∼169 000 years means that they must have been travelling very close (within one part in 108) to the speed of light. this, together with the fact that the higher and lower energy neutrinos arrived at the same time allows an upper limit to be put on the mass of a neutrino. it cannot be greater than 16 ev which is about three- millionths the mass of an electron. (other evaluations of the data give a somewhat lower value of ∼7 ev.) electronvolt the unit, called an electronvolt (ev), is often used as an indicator of mass when talking about objects like protons, neutrons and electrons. an electronvolt is a mea- surement of energy, but since mass and energy are related by einstein’s famous equation, e ! mc2, the energy equivalent of mass may be used instead. in terms of mev (1 mev !