if one naively used this formula in realms where relativistic formula would be needed, one could predict the mass and/or size of an object where the escape velocity would exceed the speed of light and thus nothing, not even light, could escape. the object would then be what is termed a black hole. black holes have no speciﬁ cally deﬁ ned size or mass, but so far we have only found evidence for black holes in two circumstances. the ﬁ rst, with masses of up to a billion or more times that of our sun, are found the heart of galaxies and will be discussed in chapter 8. the second are believed to result from the collapse of 260 introduction to astronomy and cosmology a stellar core whose mass exceeds ∼3 solar masses – the point at which neutron degeneracy pressure can no longer prevent gravitational collapse. the surface surrounding the remnant within which nothing can escape is called the event horizon. in the simplest case when the black hole is not rotating, the event horizon is the surface of a sphere and has a radius, called the schwarzschild radius, given by: rs !
2gm/c2 the interior of an event horizon is forever hidden from us, but einstein’s theories predict that at the centre of a non-rotating black hole is a singularity, a point of zero volume and inﬁ nite density where all of the black hole’s mass is located and where space–time is inﬁ nitely curved. this author does not like singularities; in his view they are where the laws of physics are inadequate to describe what is actually the case. we know that somehow, einstein’s classical theory of gravity must be combined with quantum theory and so, almost certainly, relativity cannot predict what happens at the heart a black hole. as will be covered in more detail in the description of the big bang in chapter 9, nucleons are thought to be composed of up quarks and down quarks. it is possible that at densities greater than those that can be supported by neutron degeneracy pressure, quark matter could occur – a degenerate gas of quarks. quark- degenerate matter may occur in the cores of neutron stars and may also occur in hypotheti- cal quark stars.
whether quark-degenerate matter can exist in these situations depends on the, poorly known, equations of state of both neutron-degenerate matter and quark-degenerate matter. some theoreticians even believe that quarks might themselves be composed of more fundamental particles called preons and if so, preon-degenerate mat- ter might occur at densities greater than that which can be supported by quark- degenerate matter. could it be that the matter at the heart of a black hole is of one of these forms? the more massive a black hole, the greater the size of the schwarzschild radius: a black hole with a mass 10 times greater than another will have a radius 10 times as large. a black hole of 1 solar mass would have a radius of 3 km, so a typical 10 solar mass stellar black hole would have a radius of 30 km.
7.13.1 the detection of stellar mass black holes if a stellar black hole, formed when a massive star ends its life in a supernova explosion, existed in isolation, it would be very difﬁ cult to detect: gravitational microlensing, a method now being employed to detect planets, might just be stellar evolution – the life and death of stars 261 able to do so. however, many stars exist in binary systems. in a binary system in which one of the components is a black hole, it appears that its gravity can pull matter off the companion star forming an accretion disc of gas swirling into the black hole (figure 7.17). as gas spins up as it nears the black hole due to conservation of angular momentum, the differential rotation speeds give rise to friction and the matter in the accretion disc reaches temperatures of more than 1 million k. it thus emits radiation, mostly in the x-ray part of the spectrum. x-ray telescopes have now detected many such x-ray binary systems, some of which are thought to contain a black hole. observations of the orbital size and velocity of the normal star in the system enable one to estimate the mass of its companion.