the fact that the maria are relatively lightly cratered compared with the highland regions shows that they were formed towards the end of the period in the early history of the solar system when the surfaces of the planets and moons were being bombarded with the debris left over from its formation. on the near side maria cover about 32% of the surface, but the far side has just a few patches making up just 2% in area. this requires an explanation and it appears that several factors may have contributed. elements to produce heat by radioactive decay seem to be concentrated in the near-side hemisphere so that 96 introduction to astronomy and cosmology volcanic activity – producing the lava that ﬁ lled the impact basins – would have been more proliﬁ c. the crust may also be thinner making it easier for the lava to have broken through to the surface. perhaps less likely, is the fact that the earth may have gravitationally ‘captured’ objects that might have impacted the near side and so destroyed the smooth maria regions. the lighter-coloured regions of the moon are commonly called highlands, since they are higher than most maria, though their formal name is terrae. we should expect them to be higher.
the basalt rocks that make up the maria are denser than the rocks making up the highland regions. for the moon to be in hydrostatic equilibrium when at earlier times its interior was partially molten, at some constant depth below the surface the pressure must be equal. this implies that the column mass above this depth (the mass of, say, a 1 m diameter column to the surface) must be equal. this means that the columns of lighter material must be taller so the highland regions will rise above the maria. around the rims of the giant impact craters are seen several prominent moun- tain ranges – the surviving remnants of the impact basin’s outer rims. interest- ingly, four regions on the rim of the crater peary, at the moon’s north pole, are illuminated throughout the lunar day making this a possible site for a lunar base as solar panels could be used to provide a constant energy supply. this is due to the fact that the moon has a very small tilt to the plane of the ecliptic. a further consequence of this fact is that regions at the bottom of craters near the pole are in permanent shadow.
this would have allowed ice, lodged there from cometary impacts, to have remained and thus be able to provide a source of water, oxygen and hydrogen. it should be noted that oxygen and hydrogen make an excellent rocket fuel so that perhaps a base on the moon could be used to build and fuel rockets for further space exploration. it requires far less energy to launch a rocket from the moon than from the earth. from radar observations made by the clementine spacecraft it appears that in the craters near the poles there may be pockets of ice making up a total of 1 km3 but recent radar observations from earth suggest that the radar signature indica- tive of water ice might, instead, be due to ejecta from young impact craters. the presence of signiﬁ cant water ice on the moon has still to be proven. very obvious features of the moon’s surface are the lunar impact craters formed when asteroids and comets collided with the lunar surface. there are about half a million craters with diameters greater than 1 km. the largest is some 2240 km in diameter and 13 km in depth. two prominent young craters seen on the near side are tycho and copernicus.
near full moon, light coloured rays of ejecta can be seen radiating from tycho, so it is termed a rayed crater. these are visible in the lunar eclipse image shown in figure 3.9. the surface of the moon is covered by what is called the lunar regolith. it has a thickness of about 3–5 m in the maria regions and 10–20 m in the our solar system 2 – the planets 97 highland regions. beneath the regolith lies a region of highly fractured bed- rock about 10–40 km deep. it is believed that, like the earth, the moon has a crust (about 50 km thick), mantle and core. when, following its formation the moon was molten, the heavier elements fell towards its centre – a pro- cess called differentiation – to give a dense core. the core, composed largely of iron, is thought to be small with a radius of less than 350 km and is, at least partially, molten. finding the height of a lunar mountain the image of the third quarter moon shown in figure 3.10 was taken on a night when the ‘seeing’ was excellent and the resolution was of order 1 arcsec.