some possible ways of detecting the nuclear recoils resulting from a wimp interaction: (1) in semiconductors such as silicon and germanium, electric charge is released by the recoiling atom. this ionisation can be detected and measured. cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 321 (2) in certain types of crystals and liquids that are termed ‘scintillators’, ﬂ ashes of light are emitted as the atom slows down. the light, whose amount depends on the recoil energy, can be detected by photomultiplier tubes. (3) in crystals, the recoil energy is transformed into vibrations called phonons. at room temperature these would be lost amongst thermally induced vibrations within the crystal but, if the crystal is cooled to close to absolute zero, they could be detected. though a million wimps might pass through every square centimetre each second, they will very rarely interact with a nucleus. it is estimated that within a 10 kg detector only one interaction might occur, on average, each day. to make matters worse, we are being bombarded with cosmic rays which, being made of normal matter, interact very easily. any wimp interactions would be totally swamped!
one way to greatly reduce the number of cosmic rays entering a detec- tor is to locate it deep underground – such as at the bottom of the boulby potash mine in north yorkshire at a depth of 1100 m. at this depth, the rock layers will have stopped all but one in a million cosmic rays. in contrast, only about three in a billion wimps would have interacted with nuclei in the rock above the detector. in addition, natural radioactivity in the rocks surrounding the experimental apparatus increases the ‘noise’ which can mask the wimp interactions, so the detectors are surrounded by radiation shields of high purity lead, copper wax or polythene and may be immersed within a tank of water. the chosen detectors may also emit alpha or beta particles so care must be taken over the materials from which they are made. photomultiplier tubes (to detect scintillation) cause a particular problem and ‘light guides’ are used to transfer the light from the crys- tal, such as sodium iodide, in which the interaction takes place to the shielded photomultiplier tube. possible success?
one possible way to show the presence of wimp interactions in the presence of those caused by local radioactivity is due to the fact that, in june, the motion of the earth around the sun (29.6 km s!1) is in the same direction as that of the sun in its orbit around the galactic centre (232 km s!1). hence, the earth would sweep up more wimps than in december when the motions are opposed. the difference is ∼7%, so one might expect to detect more wimps in june than in december. as the number of interactions from local radioactivity should remain constant, this gives a possible means of making detection. in the dark matter (dama) experiment at the gran sasso national laboratory, 1400 m underground in italy, observations have been made of scintillations within 100 kg of pure sodium 322 introduction to astronomy and cosmology iodide crystals. the results of seven annual cycles have given what is regarded as a possible detection but, again, there may be other explanations. 9.12.4 dark energy normal and dark matter can between them account for some 27% of the total mass/energy of the universe.
it appears that the majority, some 73%, must be something else. it is thought to be a form of energy latent within space itself that is totally uniform throughout space. in fact this could be exactly what was invoked by einstein to make his ‘static’ universe – the cosmological constant or lambda (λ) term. a positive λ term can be interpreted as a ﬁ xed positive energy density that pervades all space and is unchanging with time. its net effect would be repulsive. there are, however, other options and a range of other models are being explored where the energy is time dependent. these are given names such as ‘quintes- sence’, meaning 5th force. as the total amount of this energy and its repulsive effects are proportional to the volume of space, the effects of dark energy should become more obvious as the universe ages and its size increases. in all of the friedmann models of the universe, the initial expansion slows with time as gravity reins back the expansion, and the expansion rate would never increase.