dependent on the earth’s orbital position as halley nears the sun, it can appear both bright and spectacular as it did in 1066 and 1910 or, as in its last apparition in 1985/1986 when far from the earth, barely visible to the unaided eye. the comet was ﬁ rst photographed in 1910 when it made a very close approach to the earth – which even passed through its tail causing some alarm! it is thought that the artist giotto di bondone observed the comet in 1301, and used it to depict the star of bethlehem in his 1305 fresco, ‘the adoration of the magi’(figure 3.29). as a result, the spacecraft sent to ﬂ y-by comet halley in 1986 was called giotto. halley’s comet will next appear in our skies in 2061. a comet is now classiﬁ ed as a small solar system body that orbits the sun and which, when close to the sun, exhibits a visible coma (an extended atmosphere) and sometimes a tail.
the ‘nucleus’ of a comet is typically of order 10 km in size and is composed of rock and dust bound together by ice. the term ‘dirty snow- ball’” that is sometimes used is thus quite apt. those that are termed ‘long-period’ comets are debris left over from the condensation of the solar nebula and come from the outermost regions of the solar system, up to a light year distant from the sun, in what is usually termed the oort cloud. the cloud is thought to contain of the order of a trillion comets and is named after the dutch astronomer, jan hendrik oort, who popularized the idea in 1952. our solar system 2 – the planets 131 however, the concept was ﬁ rst proposed by an estonian astronomer, ernst opik, in 1932 so it is alternatively, and more correctly, called the opik–oort cloud. such comets will normally only ever be seen once, but occasionally their orbit will be sufﬁ ciently perturbed by jupiter or saturn to be ‘captured’ within the inner solar system with a relatively short period.
it will then become known as a ‘short- period’ comet which, by deﬁ nition, has a period of less than 200 years. however, the majority of short-period comets are thought to originate in the kuiper belt, which lies beyond the orbit of neptune. of the ∼3000 comets known by the end of 2007, several hundred have short periods. on average, about one comet per year will reach unaided-eye visibility, but only about one in ten of these will become easily visible. 3.6.2 cometary nuclei the nuclei of comets range from ∼0.5 to 50 km in size and have a very rich compo- sition; primarily made of rocks, dust and water ice along with frozen gases, such as carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, methane and ammonia. they also contain many organic compounds such as methanol, formaldehyde, ethanol and ethane and possibly even more complex molecules, such as amino acids. they are far too figure 3.29 giotto de bondone’s ‘adoration of the magi’.
giotto had seen halley’s comet in 1301 and depicted it as the star of bethlehem in his fresco painted in 1305. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page152_img1.jpeg] 132 introduction to astronomy and cosmology small to become spherical through the force of gravity and are thus irregularly shaped. comets cannot normally be seen in the outer solar system due to their small size and low albedo, and only become visible as they approach the sun whose heat radiation vaporizes the water ice and other volatile materials. this releases the dust and a giant tenuous cloud, called the coma, of dust and gas forms around the nucleus reﬂ ecting the light from the sun and so making the comet visible. the sun’s radiation pressure and solar wind then come into play causing two tails to form. the gases, in the form of ions, are most strongly affected by the solar wind and always appear to point directly away from the sun – as ﬁ rst shown by the german astronomer peter apian in 1531. the ion tail often appears bluish in colour due to emission from (cn)2, cyanogen.