in the ﬁ rst of these reac- tions, two protons form a deuterium nucleus but, given a value of 0.006 for the nuclear efﬁ ciency, deuterium would be unstable so preventing the further reac- tions that give rise to helium – stars would be inert. however, if this parameter was 0.008, meaning that nuclear forces were stronger relative to electrostatic forces, the electrostatic repulsion of two protons would be overcome and they could bind together so no hydrogen would have remained to fuel the stars. a critical reaction in the evolution of stars is the formation of carbon in the triple alpha process. as described earlier, fred hoyle played a key role in the understanding of this reaction and pointed out that even a change of a few per cent from the observed value of 0.007 would have severe consequences on the amount of carbon that would be formed in stars – with obvious consequences for life as we understand it. 328 introduction to astronomy and cosmology 9.14.1 a ‘multiverse’ so how can it be that all the parameters described above are ﬁ nely tuned so that we can exist? there are two possible reasons.
the ﬁ rst is that our universe was ‘designed’ by its creator speciﬁ cally so that it could contain intelligent beings, a view taken by some scientist-theologians. a second view is that there are many universes, each with different properties; the term ‘multiverse’ has been applied to this view. we have no knowledge of what lies in the cosmos beyond the hori- zon of our visible universe. different regions could have different properties; these regions could be regarded as different universes within the overall cosmos. our part of the cosmos is, like baby bear’s porridge, just right. 9.14.2 string theory: another approach to a multiverse theoretical physicists have a fundamental problem. einstein’s general theory of relativity that relates to gravity is a classical theory, whereas the other forces are described by quantum mechanics. a ‘theory of everything’ has yet to be found that can bring together all the fundamental forces. one approach that is being actively pursued is that of string theory. the early string theories envisioned a universe of 10 dimensions, not four, making up a 10-dimensional space–time.
the additional six beyond our three of space and one of time are compacted down into tiny regions of space of order 10!35 m in size and called strings. these are the fundamental building blocks of matter. different ‘particles’ and their proper- ties, depend on the way these strings are vibrating – rather like the way a string of a violin can be excited into different modes of vibration to give harmonically related sounds. as these strings move, they warp the space–time surrounding them in precisely the way predicted by general relativity. so string theory uniﬁ es the quantum theory of particles and general relativity. in recent years ﬁ ve string theories have been developed each with differing properties. in one there can be open strings (a strand with two ends) as well as closed strings where the ends meet to form a ring. the remaining four only have closed rings. more recently ed witten and paul townsend have produced an 11-dimensional ‘m-theory’ which brings together the ﬁ ve competing string theories into a coherent whole. this 11th dimension (and it not impossible that there could be more) gives a further way of thinking about a multiverse.
we can think of a simple analogy: take a sliced loaf and separate each slice by, say, 1 cm. on each of these slices add some ants. the ants could survive, at least for a while, eating the bread of what is, to them, effectively a two-dimensional universe. they would not be aware of the existence of other colonies of ants on adjacent slices. however, we can see that all of these exist within a cosmos that actually has a third dimension. cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 329 in just the same way, rather than being individual regions of one large spatially linked cosmos, it could be that other ‘universes’ exist in their own space–time – hidden from ours within a further dimension. 9.15 intelligent life in the universe our universe is suitable for life. how widespread will it be? we suspect that the vast majority of life forms will have the same basic chemistry as our carbon based life. the elements that play a major role in our chemistry (carbon, oxygen and nitrogen) are those ﬁ rst produced in stars and are thus very common. in addition, carbon has the most diverse chemistry of any element.