if it had been discovered in recent times, it is highly unlikely that it would have been given the status of a planet. for these reasons, the hayden planetarium in new york had already, with some controversy, omitted pluto from its planet gallery. chapter 3 introduction to astronomy and cosmology ian morison © 2008 john wiley & sons, ltd 76 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the deﬁ nition that was agreed upon in august 2006 had three parts: (1) a planet orbits the sun. (2) a planet has enough mass so that gravity can overcome the strength of the body and so becomes approximately round. it is said to be in hydro- static equilibrium. (3) a planet has ‘cleared’ its orbit – that is, it is the only body of its size in the region of the solar system at that distance from the sun. the ﬁ rst two parts are fairly obvious, but the third is less so. essentially it means that there must not be other comparable sized objects orbiting the sun at similar distances. it is part (3) that demotes pluto. the iau also produced a deﬁ nition of what will become known as dwarf planets.
these satisfy parts (1) and (2) of the deﬁ nition of a planet, but not part (3). figure 3.1 the eight planets of our solar system. image: wikipedia commons, nasa. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page97_img1.jpeg] our solar system 2 – the planets 77 in addition they must not be the satellite of another body. as a result pluto is now classed as a dwarf planet along with 2003 ub313, which has now been given the name eris. the minor planet ceres also satisﬁ es the deﬁ nition of a dwarf planet so currently we have eight planets and three dwarf planets in the solar system. it is likely that, over time, the number of dwarf planets will increase as further large objects are discovered in the region beyond neptune. 3.2 planetary orbits figure 1.13 shows the terms that are given to the orbital properties of the planets. they orbit the sun in elliptical orbits with the sun at one focus. a key parameter is the semi-major axis, a, which is half the major axis of the ellipse.
for a circular orbit, a will be the radius of the orbit. due to the eccentricity, e, of their orbits their distance from the sun varies from a minimum distance (at perihelion) of a(1!e) to a maximum distance (at apehelion) of a(1 " e). in our solar system venus, whose orbit has an eccentricity of 0.007, is in a vir- tually circular orbit. neptune and the earth have near circular orbits with eccen- tricities of 0.01 and 0.17, respectively. mercury and the dwarf planets pluto and eris have the most eccentric orbits with eccentricities of 0.205, 0.249 and 0.441, respectively. it is worth noting that, for part of its orbit, pluto can come closer to the sun than neptune. an interesting consequence of the eccentricity of the orbit of mars is that when mars comes closest to us (every 2 years and 2 months) its distance from us can vary signiﬁ cantly.
as a result, its angular size at closest approach will vary signiﬁ cantly and so determine the amount of surface detail that we can see from earth. mars is closest to us within a few days of opposition – that is, when it is on the opposite side of the sky to the sun – and will thus be seen approxi- mately south at midnight. mars will be seen with the smallest angular size at opposition when mars is furthest from the sun (at aphelion) and the earth is closest from the sun (at perihelion) as shown in figure 3.2a. figure 3.2b shows the inverse situation when mars will be seen with the largest angular diameter during opposition. the earth is at aphelion, furthest from the sun, on july 4 each year, so the very closest approaches of mars will occur in the summer months. the closest approach for nearly 60 000 years occurred on august 27, 2003, when mars was 55 758 006 km from earth and had an angular diameter of just over 25 arcsec (figure 3.3).