planets like earth were thought to have been very common and so advanced life like ours was thought to be widespread – we were not special. as we have learnt more about the history of our earth, how plate tectonics have helped recycle carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere, how jupiter prevents too many comets from impacting the earth and how our large moon has stabilized the earth’s rotation axis, some scientists now believe that the conditions that have allowed intelligent life to arise here may well be very uncommon. it really could be that we are special, and it is not impossible that we are the only advanced life form now within our milky way galaxy.
3.5.4 the moon mass 7.3477 " 1023 kg radius (mean) 1737.1 km rotation period 27.3216 days (in synchronous rotation) semi-major axis of orbit 384 399 km eccentricity 0.0549 orbital period 27.3216 days average orbital speed 1.022 km s!1 synodic period 29.5306 days (from new moon to new moon) orbital inclination 5.145° (with respect to the ecliptic) our solar system 2 – the planets 95 the moon is the ﬁ fth largest satellite in the solar system. it has a diameter slightly more than a quarter that of the earth and its average distance is about 30 times that of the earth’s diameter. the gravitational pull on its surface is about one-sixth that on the earth. due to the fact that it has an elliptical orbit, its angular size varies by about ∼12%; from 0.5548° at perigee, when it is closest to the earth, down to 0.4923° at apogee, when it is furthest from the earth.
partly due to its eccentric orbit, partly due to the inclination of its orbit and partly due to the fact that at moonrise and moonset we see it from different relative positions in space we can observe a total of 59% of the moon’s surface at one time or another. this effect is called libration. the well known moon illusion makes the moon appear largest when near the horizon. however, it will of course be closer to us when highest in the sky and its angular size will actually be about 1.5% larger! our perception of size is linked with how far away we believe an object is from us. it appears that we ‘see’ the celestial sphere above us, not as a true hemisphere, but one which is ﬂ attened overhead so that we believe that the objects above us in the sky are nearer to us than those near the horizon. so, observing the moon above us, we believe it to be closer and mentally reduce its perceived size. the moon only reﬂ ects about 8% of the light incident upon it and is one of the least reﬂ ective objects in the solar system reﬂ ecting about the same proportion of light as a lump of coal.
the side of the moon that faces earth is called the near side, and the opposite side the far side. even with the unaided eye one can clearly see that there are two distinct types of surface on the near side. we see light regions called ‘highlands’ and darker areas of the surface that we call ‘maria’, so-called because they were thought to be seas and oceans and were given beautiful names such as oceanus procellarum, mare tanquillatatis and sinus iridum – the ocean of storms, the sea of tranquillity and the bay of rainbows. when the far side of the moon was ﬁ rst photographed by the soviet probe luna 3 in 1959, a surprising feature was its almost complete lack of maria. we now know that the maria regions are covered by basaltic lava. many are circular, such as mare crisium, which implies a number of giant impact events. these would have shattered the lunar crust allowing lava to well up and ﬁ ll the resulting depressions.