as all the material in the galaxy is rotat- ing around its centre, when we look in different directions along the galactic 272 introduction to astronomy and cosmology plane the material in the spiral arms – in some directions we might see several – will have differing velocities away from or towards us. the hydrogen line from these different arms will thus be doppler shifted to higher or lower frequencies. due to motion of the gas within an element of an arm that we observe, any given arm will give a line proﬁ le that is approximately gaussian as shown in figure 8.8a. this shows the gas close to us in our local spiral arm so its average velocity relative to us is zero. if the beam of our radio telescope receives radia- tion from the hydrogen gas in a spiral arm coming towards us we will see that gaussian proﬁ le shifted to higher frequencies (figure 8.8b), whilst if moving away we will observe it at lower frequencies (figure 8.8c).
in general, should we look in some arbitrary direction we may observe several arms and so get a more complex proﬁ le (figure 8.8d) which can be ‘dissected’ into the individual proﬁ les from each arm (figure 8.8e). figure 8.9 shows some hydrogen line proﬁ les observed using a 6.4-m radio telescope at the jodrell bank observatory. each has the galactic latitude at which it was observed; latitude 0 would mean that our telescope would be pointing figure 8.8 hydrogen line proﬁ les. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page293_img1.jpeg] galaxies and the large scale structure of the universe 273 directly at the centre of the galaxy, latitude 180 directly away from it – looking out from our galaxy. you can see that in this latter direction, there is only one peak in the spectrum which is centred on zero velocity with respect to us. this is the hydrogen in our local spiral arm which is all that we observe in this direction and is, of course, at rest with us.
as we lie within our spiral arm there will always be a peak at zero relative velocity but, as we look along the milky way in other direc- tions, we see other peaks in the spectrum, corresponding to other spiral arms. for example, at latitude 90 (l ! 90) we see three other spiral arms. by observing such hydrogen line proﬁ les along the galactic plane, and using a model of the rotation curve of the galaxy, it is possible to locate the position of each observed arm along the line of sight through the galaxy and build up a pic- ture of the spiral structure of our own galaxy. figure 8.10 shows a section of the plane of the milky way with vertical relief showing the brightness of hydrogen. the local arm appears like a range of mountains on the right of the plot, with the perseus arm curving out to its left. the more distant outer arm can just be seen appearing like ‘foothills’ even farther to the left. the fact that our galaxy has a spiral structure is somewhat of a puzzle (figure 8.11). in its life, our sun has circled the galactic centre about 20 times so why have the spiral arms not wound up?
the solution is hinted at by a visual clue. spiral arms seen in other galaxies stand out because they contain many bright blue stars – remember a single very hot star can outshine 50 000 suns like ours! however, very hot bright stars must be young as they have very short lives, so the spiral structure we see now is not that which would have been observed in the past. as bertil lindblad ﬁ rst suggested, it appears that the spi- ral arms are transitory and caused by a spiral density wave rotating round the galactic centre – a ripple that sweeps around the galaxy moving through the dust and gas. this compresses the gas as it passes and can trigger the collapse of gas clouds so forming the massive blue stars that delineate the spiral arms. the young blue stars show us where the density wave has just passed through but l = 90 –200 –100 0 100 –200 –200 –200 –100 –100 –100 0 0 0 100 100 100 l = 120 l = 150 l = 180 figure 8.9 galactic hydrogen line proﬁ les. image: christine jordan, university of manchester.