[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page333_img1.jpeg] cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 313 inﬂ ation would also ensure that the whole of the visible universe would have uniform properties so also addressing the horizon problem. this is a result of the fact that, prior to the inﬂ ationary period, the volume of space that now forms the visible universe was sufﬁ ciently small that radiation could easily travel across it and so give it a uniform temperature. 9.9 the big bang and the formation of the primeval elements half of the gravitational potential energy that arose from this inﬂ ationary period was converted into kinetic energy from which arose an almost identical number of particles and antiparticles, but with a very small excess of matter particles (∼1 part in several billion). all of the antiparticles annihilated with their respec- tive particles leaving a relatively small number of particles in a bath of radiation. the bulk of this ‘baryonic matter’ was in the form of quarks that, at about 1 s after the origin, grouped into threes to form protons and neutrons.
(two up quarks and one down quark form a proton, and one up quark and two down quarks a neutron. the up quark has !2/3 charge and the down quark "1/3 charge so the proton has a charge of !1 and the neutron 0 charge.) an almost equal number of protons and neutrons were produced but, as free neutrons are unstable with a half-life of 10.6 min, the only ones to remain were those that were incorporated into helium nuclei comprising two protons and two neutrons. so, after a few minutes, the normal (baryonic) matter in the universe was very largely composed of hydrogen nuclei (protons), helium nuclei (alpha particles) and electrons – with one electron for each proton.
(we now believe that several times more ‘dark matter’, whose constitution will be discussed below, was also created.) 9.10 the ‘ripples’ in the cosmic microwave background observations by the cobe spacecraft ﬁ rst showed that the cmb did not have a totally uniform temperature and, since then, observations from the wmap spacecraft, balloons and high mountain tops have been able to make maps of these so called ‘ripples’ in the cmb – temperature ﬂ uctuations in the observed temperature of typically 60 µk (figure 9.8). why are these small variations present? to answer this we need to understand a little about dark matter. though not yet directly detected, its presence has been inferred from a wide variety of observations which will be discussed in detail later. as described in section 9.7 about the cmb, for ∼380 000 years following the big bang, the matter and radiation were interacting as the energy of the photons was sufﬁ cient to ionize the atoms giving rise to a plasma of nuclei and free electrons. this gives rise to two results: 314 introduction to astronomy and cosmology (1) the radiation and matter were in thermal equilibrium and the radiation will thus have had a black body spectrum.
(2) the plasma of nuclei and electrons will have been very homogeneous as the photons acted rather like a whisk beating up a mix of ingredients. it is the second of these that is important to the argument that follows. when the temperature drops to the point that atoms can form, the matter can begin to clump under gravity to form stars and galaxies. simulations have shown that, as the initial gas is so uniformly distributed, it would take perhaps 8–10 billion years for regions of the gas to become sufﬁ ciently dense for this to happen. however, we know that galaxies came into existence around 1 billion years after the big bang. something must have aided the process. we believe that this was dark mat- ter that was not composed of normal matter and which is called non-baryonic dark matter. as this would not have been coupled to the radiation, it could have begun to gravitationally ‘clump’ immediately after the big bang. thus, when the normal matter became decoupled from the photons, there were ‘gravitational wells’ in place formed by concentrations of dark matter. the normal matter could then quickly fall into these wells, rapidly increasing its density and thus greatly accelerating the process of galaxy formation.