in the binary pulsar system a 1.4 solar mass pulsar is orbiting a companion star of equal mass. it thus comprises two co-rotating stellar mass objects. general relativity predicts that such a system will radiate gravitational waves – ripples in space–time that propagate out through the universe at the speed of light. though gravitational wave detectors are now in operation across the globe, this gravitational radiation is far too weak to be directly detected. however, there is a consequent effect that can be detected. as the binary system is losing energy as the result of its gravita- tional radiation, the two stars should gradually spiral in towards each other. the fact that one of these objects is a pulsar allows us to very accurately determine the orbital parameters of the system. precise observations over the 40 years since it was ﬁ rst discovered, shown in figure 7.15, show how the two bodies are slowly spiralling in towards each other, exactly agreeing with einstein’s pre- dictions! taylor and hulse received the nobel prize for physics in 1993 for this outstanding work.
it is another pulsar system, this time where both objects in the system are pul- sars, and called the ‘double pulsar’, that has produced one of the most stringent tests of general relativity to date (figure 7.16). it was discovered in a survey carried out at the parkes telescope in australia using receivers and data acquisition equip- ment built at the university of manchester’s jodrell bank observatory. in analysis of the resulting data using a super-computer at jodrell bank the double pulsar 258 introduction to astronomy and cosmology figure 7.15 the cumulative eﬀ ect on the period of the orbit on the objects in the binary pulsar system due to the emission of gravitational waves. (the break in observations following 1992 was due to a major upgrade to the arecibo telescope.) figure 7.16 the double pulsar system, showing the distortion of space–time resulting from their mass. image: michael kramer, university of manchester.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page279_img1.jpeg] [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page279_img2.jpeg] stellar evolution – the life and death of stars 259 was discovered in 2003. it comprises two pulsars of 1.25 and 1.34 solar masses spinning with rotation rates of 2.8 s and 23 ms, respectively. they orbit each other every 2.4 h with an orbital major axis just less than the diameter of the sun. the neutron stars are moving at speeds of 0.01% that of light and it is thus a system in which the effects of general relativity are more apparent than in any other known system. at this moment in time, general relativity predicts that the two neutron stars should be spiralling in towards each other at a rate of 7 mm per day. observations made across the world since then have shown this to be exactly as predicted. in fact, ﬁ ve predictions of general relativity can be tested in this unique system. the one that has so far provided the highest precision is a measurement of what is called the shapiro delay, which was discussed in section 2.9.2.
by great good fortune, the orbital plane of the two pulsars is almost edge on to us. thus, when one of the two pulsars is furthest away from us its pulses have to pass close to the nearer one on their way to our radio telescopes. they will thus have to travel a longer path through the curved space surrounding the nearer one and suffer a delay that is close to 92 µs. the timing measurements agree with theory to an accuracy of 0.05%. einstein must be at least 99.95% right! 7.13 black holes if one projected a ball vertically from the equator of the earth with increasing speed, there comes a point, when the speed reaches 11.2 km s!1, when the ball would not fall back to earth but would escape the earth’s gravitational pull. this is the earth’s escape velocity. if either the density of the earth was greater or its radius smaller (or both) then the escape velocity would increase as newton’s for- mula for escape velocity shows: v0 " !""" 2gm _____ r0 where v0 is the escape velocity, m the mass of the object, r0 its radius and g the universal constant of gravitation.