5.2 the human eye our eyes are all that we need if we wish to observe the outlines of the constellations, the majestic sweep of the milky way or the ﬂ eeting trail of a meteor arcing across the sky. however, to use them to view the heavens at their best, a little time is required for them to become dark-adapted. first, and most obviously, in dark conditions the pupils will dilate so allowing more light to enter the eye (figure 5.7). this happens over a period of 20 s or so and will thus almost immediately enable one to see fainter stars. the typical daylight size of the pupil is about 2.5–3 mm across but this extends to 5–7 mm under dark conditions. sadly, as one gets older, the maximum size is likely to be nearer 5 mm rather than 7 mm (a factor of 2 in area) so younger people will deﬁ nitely be able to see better in the dark! there is a second dark adaptation mechanism that takes about 20 min to come into effect.
without high light levels reaching the retina, vitamin a is converted ﬁ rst into retinene and then into rhodoposin (visual purple) that signiﬁ cantly improves the sensitivity of the rods and cones which are the light sensitive receptors in the retina of the eye. strong white light can quickly 162 introduction to astronomy and cosmology reverse this change, but red light is far less damaging which is why astronomers use red light to view their star charts. in daylight we tend to use a region of the retina called the fovea which is densely populated with cones that are colour sensitive but require high light levels to work well. this is why objects that can have beautiful colours when imaged photographically tend to appear as shades of grey when viewed through a telescope. in contrast, the rods are not colour sensitive but are more sensitive to light. away from the central foveal region, the cones are fewer in number and the rods are more closely packed. we can thus see fainter objects by using ‘averted vision’ – directing our gaze to one side of the object of interest.
even after dark adaptation, what we will actually be able to see on any given night depends critically on the amount of dust and water vapour in the atmosphere. these absorb and scatter the starlight so making it difﬁ cult to see fainter objects. the dust and vapour will also scatter back towards our eyes any light from the ground – called light pollution – making the sky appear brighter and the problem even worse. we use the term ‘transparency’ to deﬁ ne how clear the sky is. at a dark site with a very transparent sky we would typically be able to see a 6–6.5 magnitude star looking towards the zenith. light pollution com- bined with an atmosphere laden with dust and water vapour will reduce this value signiﬁ cantly. to give the best chance of viewing the heavens one should try to be as far away from built up areas as possible – even a few miles will help signiﬁ cantly. figure 5.7 the human eye.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page183_img1.jpeg] observing the universe 163 5.3 the use of a telescope or pair of binoculars to see fainter objects collecting the light with a larger aperture than our eye will allow us to observe fainter objects as the larger aperture of, say, a telescope will collect more light that our dark adapted eye. this increase over the eye alone will depend on the relative areas. a telescope with an objective whose aperture is, say, 150 mm will collect (150/7)2 times more light than a pupil of aperture 7 mm. this is 460 times more light, so one would expect to be able to see a star 460 times fainter that with the eye alone. this can be converted into a magnitude difference: ∆m ! 2.5 " log10(460) ! 6.65 thus we would expect that a fully efﬁ cient 150 mm telescope would enable one to see objects 6.6 magnitudes fainter that with the unaided eye.