326 introduction to astronomy and cosmology figure 9.14 shows how we believe that the scale size of the universe has changed with time in the past and how it will expand ever faster in the future. you will see that the actual age of the universe is similar to the hubble age with a value of about 13–14 thousand million years. [the latest values from the jodrell bank’s ‘very small array’ (vsa) and wmap are 13.6 and 13.7 thousand million years, respectively.] 9.14 a universe ﬁ t for intelligent life the very fact that you are reading this book tells us that our universe has just the right properties for intelligent life to have evolved. but why should this be so? as eloquently described in a book just six numbers by martin rees, there are a number of parameters that have a major inﬂ uence on how universes can evolve and how stars produce elements that are needed for life. two of these have been already been covered in this chapter; the constants omega, ω, and lambda, λ.
if ω had been higher the universe would have rapidly collapsed without allowing life a chance to evolve; if it had been smaller galaxies and stars would not have formed. in addition, if λ, which is surprisingly small, had been larger it would have prevented stars and galaxies forming. you have also read in this chapter how the galaxies formed as a result of ﬂ uctuations in the density of the primeval universe – the so-called ‘ripples’ that are observed in the cmb. the parameter that deﬁ nes the amplitude of the ripples has a value of ∼10!5. if this parameter were smaller the condensations of dark matter that took place soon after the big bang (and were crucial to the formation of the galaxies) would have been both smaller and more spread out resulting in rather diffuse galaxy structures in which star formation would be very inefﬁ cient figure 9.14 the scale size of the universe with time. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page347_img1.jpeg] cosmology – the origin and evolution of the universe 327 and planetary systems could not have formed. if the parameter had been less than 10!6, galaxies would not have formed at all!
however, if this parameter were greater than 10!5 the scale of the ‘ripples’ would be greater and giant structures, far greater in scale than galaxies, would form and then collapse into super- massive black holes – a violent universe with no place for life! one parameter of our universe is so well known that it is barely given a moment’s thought – the number of spatial dimensions, three. if this were either two or four, life could not exist. though we perceive gravity to be a ‘strong’ force (because we are close to a very massive body) it is actually incredibly weak in comparison with the electrostatic forces that control atomic structures and, for example, cause protons to repel each other. the factor is of order ∼10!36. let us suppose gravity was stronger by a factor of a million. on the small scale, that of atoms and molecules, there would be no difference, but it would be vastly easier to make a gravitationally bound object such as the sun and planets but whose sizes would be about a billion times smaller. any galaxies formed in the universe would be very small with tightly packed stars whose interactions would prevent the formation of stable planetary orbits.
the tiny stars would burn up their fuel rapidly allowing no time for life to evolve even if there were suitable places for it to arise. our intelligent life could not have arisen here on earth if this ratio had been even slightly smaller than its observed value. einstein’s famous equation, e " mc2, relates the amount of energy that can be extracted from a given amount of mass, so the value of c is obviously fundamentally important. in practice only a small part of the energy bound up in matter can be released, as in the conversion of hydrogen to helium. this process releases 0.7% of the mass of the four protons that form helium – a percentage closely linked to the strength of the strong nuclear force. this parameter, 0.007, has been called ‘nuclear efﬁ ciency’. however, if this value was too small, say 0.006, the sequence of reactions that build up helium could not take place.