we know that our sun has an absolute magnitude of !4.8 – which is the apparent magnitude that it would have at a distance of 10 pc. the distant g2 star is thus 5 magnitudes fainter than our sun would appear if it were to be at a distance of 10 pc. however, 5 magnitudes correspond to a brightness ratio of 100, so the distant star must be (100)1/2 or 10 times further away than 10 pc. hence, the distant g2 star lies at a distance of 100 pc. as a ﬁ nal example, consider two b8 stars (like rigel, in orion). rigel has an absolute magnitude of "6.7, this being the apparent magnitude that it would have at a distance of 10 pc. the distant star lies in a daughter galaxy of our own milky way galaxy called the large magellanic cloud (lmc) and has an apparent magnitude of !11.7.
the magnitude difference is thus 18.4 magnitudes corre- sponding to a brightness ratio of: 2.51218.4 # 23 $ 106 from the inverse square law it will thus lie at a distance of: 10 $ (23 $ 106)1/2 pc # 10 $ 4800 pc # 48 000 pc this is thus a measure of the distance of the lmc. the method of spectroscopic parallax suffers from two fundamental problems. the ﬁ rst is that stars of the same spectral type do not necessarily have the same luminosity as the intrinsic luminosity of a star depends to an extent on what is called the star’s metallicity – the percentage of elements heavier than helium or hydrogen in its makeup – so reducing the accuracy of the method. the second is that the correlation between spectral type and luminosity is not perfect: the main sequence is not a thin line, but a band and the scatter in magnitude for a speciﬁ c spectral type (such as f0) is of order !/"1 magnitude.
one magnitude is a brightness ratio of 2.512, so this gives a distance error of !/" (2.512)1/2 which equals 1.6, so spectroscopic parallax is not that precise. the measurements of the luminosity of distant stars suffer from a further problem; that of extinction. (this is the name given to the absorption of light by intervening dust.) this would reduce the observed brightness of a star and so make it appear to be further away. there is, however, a way in which this can be detected and corrected for to some extent. the spectral type will indicate that the star has a particular surface temperature. we have also seen how the temperature can be estimated from the colour index. in the absence of extinction these should be approximately the same. however, dust absorbs more light in the blue (shorter the properties of stars 219 wavelength) end of the spectrum than it does at the red (longer wavelength) end of the spectrum. thus the light from a star whose light has passed through dust clouds will appear redder than it should. this will alter its colour index and indi- cate a lower surface temperature than that indicated by the spectral index of the star.
from this difference it is possible to estimate the effect on the star’s apparent brightness and so make a suitable correction. 6.9 the hertzsprung–russell diagram in the early 1900s, ejnar hertzsprung in denmark and henry russell at princeton university in the usa independently plotted a graph of stellar luminosity against temperature which has become known as the hertzsprung–russell diagram (h–r diagram) (figure 6.6). both axes are logarithmic. the x axis represents tempera- ture. (note: it increases to the left of the plot.) instead of using temperature to deﬁ ne the ordinate, both spectral type and the (b-v) colour index can be used as figure 6.6 the hertzsprung–russell diagram. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page240_img1.jpeg] 220 introduction to astronomy and cosmology both are directly related to temperature. henry russell’s ﬁ rst diagram, published in the journal nature in 1914, used the spectral type.