how much brighter will a star of 1st magnitude appear compared with one of 9th magnitude? 2. what is the apparent magnitude of a star that appears 251 times less bright than the 0th magnitude star vega? 3. an observer whose dark-adapted pupil is 5 mm in diameter can observe a star of 6th magnitude towards the zenith (overhead). he now observes with a pair of binoculars having an objective size of 40 mm. the sensitivity of the binoculars compared with the eye is proportional to the ratio of the areas of the objective and pupil so that, using the binoculars, the observer astronomy, an observational science 37 will be able to observe fainter objects. what is the faintest magnitude star that the observer might hope to observe at the zenith with their use? 4. the observed brightness of a luminous object falls off as the square of its distance from us (the inverse square law). two stars of identical luminosity are observed: the apparent brightness of the further one is 10 000 times less than the nearer. (a) what is the difference in apparent magnitude? (b) how many times further away is it? 5.
a star is observed to cross the meridian at an elevation of 67°, as seen from an observatory at a latitude of 52° north. what is the declination of the star? what would be the declination of a star observed to transit at an elevation of 20°? 6. a star is observed to cross the meridian (due south) at an elevation of 34°, as seen from an observatory sited at a latitude of 42° north. what is the declination of the star? at the moment of transit, a clock running on universal time (ut) read 03 h 16 min 24 s. at the previous midnight, the sidereal time was 14 h 38 min 54 s. calculate the right ascension of the star. 7. the newly discovered ‘dwarf planet’, eris, has an elliptical orbit with a semi-major axis of 67.89 au. calculate its period in years. 8. an asteroid is orbiting the sun at a distance of 2.7 au. how long does it take to orbit the sun? 9.
assuming that venus has a circular orbit and that it orbits the sun every 224.7 days, calculate its distance from the sun in astronomical units. as venus passed closest to the earth a planetary radar at jodrell bank measured the round trip travel time of a radar pulse to be 272 s. estimate the value of the astronomical unit, the semi-major axis of the earth’s orbit around the sun. (assume that the earth also a circular orbit and that the velocity of light is 3 ! 108 m s"1.) our solar system 1 – the sun in this chapter we will cover how the solar system was formed and study our sun: how it generates its energy by nuclear fusion, the characteristics of its atmo- sphere and how its solar wind and magnetic ﬁ eld interacts with our earth. finally, to continue the story of einstein’s theories in chapter 1, we will see how solar eclipses were able to provide proof of einstein’s general theory of relativity – his theory of gravity.
2.1 the formation of the solar system it is believed from studies of meteorites – remnants of the early solar system – that our sun and planets formed some 4.6 billion years ago from what is called a giant molecular cloud. the gas and dust making up this cloud had been created over billions of years by the processing of primeval hydrogen and helium in stars to create heavier elements that are then ejected into space at the end of their lives. the nebula hypothesis, which explains how the sun and planets were created, was ﬁ rst proposed by emanuel swedenborg in 1734 and then, independently, by pierre-simon laplace in 1796. it is now thought that the initial cloud of dust and gas would have been about 1 pc (3.26 ly) across and that its collapse was trig- gered by the shock waves from one or more supernovae (the explosive end to giant stars). these would have produced regions of higher density than their surround- ings which would then collapse under their own gravity. the region that spawned our solar system would have had a diameter of perhaps 13 000 au with a total mass perhaps twice that of our sun.