its composition would have been similar to that of our sun, with 98% made up of hydrogen (∼74%) and helium (∼24%) and about 2% of heavier elements. it is interesting to get a feel of its composition from a list of some of the most common isotopes of the elements in nuclei per million: chapter 2 introduction to astronomy and cosmology ian morison © 2008 john wiley & sons, ltd 40 introduction to astronomy and cosmology hydrogen-1 705 700 helium-4 275 200 carbon-12 3032 nitrogen-14 1105 oxygen-16 5920 neon-20 1548 sodium-23 33 magnesium-24 513 aluminum-27 58 silicon-28 653 sulphur-32 396 argon-36 77 calcium-40 60 iron-56 1169 nickel-58 49 notice that those elements whose nuclei have an integral multiple of four nucleons are relatively common. we will see when we study stellar evolution that these elements are those produced by the build up of helium nuclei and thus their atomic numbers are integral multiples of four.
iron is also common as it is the element with the most stable nucleus and the virtual end point of the nuclear fusion processes during the lifetime of a star. elements of higher atomic number are only created when a star explodes at the end of its life and are thus comparatively rare. it is likely that the solar nebula would have had some rotational energy. as the nebula collapsed, conservation of angular momentum meant that it would have begun to spin faster and, as it became denser, collisions within it would cause the gas to heat up. this would increase the pressure within the nebula so tending to make it expand and thus preventing further collapse. the term ‘giant molecular cloud’ used for the initial gas and dust cloud from which our solar system formed implies that it contained many molecules. these played an important role in allow- ing the nebula to condense in that transitions between their vibrational states can emit long wavelength infrared photons. these could escape through the dust and so carry energy away from the cloud so preventing a build up of heat that would have prevented further collapse. sir james jeans showed that a nebula would only collapse if it was sufﬁ ciently massive.
a gas cloud would have to exceed what is termed the jeans mass in order to collapse – a dense, cool cloud being able to collapse more easily than a less dense, warmer cloud. the initial mass required, even for a dense, cool cloud, has our solar system 1 – the sun 41 to be many solar masses so it is virtually impossible for a single star to form on its own and so young stars are seen in clusters like the hyades and pleiades clusters in the constellation taurus. the pleiades cluster, shown in figure 2.1, contains about 500 stars. it is believed that the pleiades cluster is passing through a dust cloud and this gives rise to the scattered light that is reﬂ ected from regions surrounding the brighter stars – known as a reﬂ ection nebula. due to the forces of gravity and the net angular momentum of the nebula, the nebula ﬂ attened into a spinning protoplanetary disc. its overall diameter was roughly 200 au with a dense central region that rapidly increased in temperature to form what is called a protostar (figure 2.2).
after around 100 million years, the temperature and pressure at the core of the protostar became so great (∼10 million k) that its hydrogen began to fuse into helium and the pressure produced by the resultant gamma rays became able to counter the force of gravitation. the ﬂ edgling star went through a turbulent phase, throwing off perhaps half its mass, until it ﬁ nally stabilized. the protostar had become a star, our sun. from the gas and dust surrounding the nascent star, the various planets were formed through a process known as accretion. dust grains in orbit around the protostar clumped together and formed what are called planetesimals, between 1 km and 10 km in diameter, which then gradually increased in size by further figure 2.1 the pleiades cluster. image: digitized sky survey nasa/esa/aura/caltech. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page62_img1.jpeg] 42 introduction to astronomy and cosmology collisions.