2.7 the sun’s magnetic ﬁ eld and the sunspot cycle 2.7.1 sunspots a photograph of the sun’s surface will usually show some darker regions on the surface. these are called sunspots and often appear in pairs or groups – a sunspot group. each spot has a central ‘umbra’ surrounded by a lighter ‘penumbra’. they appear dark because they are cooler than the average surface temperature. the umbra has a typical temperature 1000 k less than its surroundings. around the outside of a sunspot group may be seen an area which is brighter than the normal surface. this is called a ‘plage’ – the french word for ‘beach’. (french beaches often have white sand!) the passage of sunspots across the sun’s surface has been used to measure its rotation period. it has been found that at the equator the period is ∼28 days, but this increases with increasing latitude and is ∼35 days near the sun’s poles, an effect called differential rotation. sunspots are intimately linked to this differential rotation and how it affects the sun’s magnetic ﬁ eld.
the sun’s ﬁ eld must be created by the movement of charged particles and its cause almost certainly lies in the convective zone, but no really good model yet exists. imagine that at one particular moment the sun has a uniform bipolar ﬁ eld just like that shown by iron ﬁ lings under the inﬂ uence of a bar magnet. looking at the sun’s face we could imagine a ﬁ eld line just below the photosphere directly down the centre of the sun’s disc. the ﬁ eld and surrounding material remain locked together in what follows. now move forwards in time by 35 days. the ﬁ eld close to the poles will have made one complete rotation and be in the same posi- tion as seen from earth but close to the equator it will have rotated an additional amount ∼(35 " 28)/28 of one rotation or 1/4 ! 360°, which is 90°. after three further rotations (as measured near the poles) the ﬁ eld near the equator will have one additional rotation. you can see that the ﬁ eld is being ‘wound up’ and becomes our solar system 1 – the sun 63 more intense.
it gains ‘buoyancy’ and, in places, rises in a loop above the surface. where it passes through the surface, the magnetic ﬁ eld inhibits the convective ﬂ ow of energy to the surface so the localized region will be cooler than the surface in general – a sunspot appears. the energy that is inhibited from reaching the sur- face here will tend to reach the surface in the area surrounding a sunspot group making this region hotter and thus brighter – a plage (figure 2.10). it is possible to measure the polarity of the ﬁ eld across the sun’s surfaces and we can examine the polarity of the ﬁ eld associated with sunspot pairs (figure 2.11). consider a sunspot pair in the upper hemisphere. assuming that the north pole is at the top then, as the ﬁ eld leaves the surface, it will be towards us and have figure 2.10 the winding of the sun’s magnetic ﬁ eld due to the diﬀ erential rotation of the sun. figure 2.11 the polarity of sunspots as produced by a solar magnetogram. image: ian morison derived from a soho space observatory image, esa, nasa.
[image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page84_img1.jpeg] [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page84_img2.jpeg] 64 introduction to astronomy and cosmology positive polarity. as the ﬁ eld re-enters the surface it will be away from us and have negative polarity. so the spots in a sunspot pair will show opposite polarity. in the upper hemisphere the left-hand spot would have positive polarity and the right- hand negative polarity. however, as the ﬁ eld reverses direction at the equator the sunspots in a pair observed in the lower hemisphere will have the opposite sense. the twisting of the magnetic ﬁ eld from its initial state gradually produces an increase in the number of sunspots observed across the sun’s surface. this deter- mines what is termed the sunspot number which reaches a peak after 3–4 years – called sunspot maximum. the ﬁ eld then begins to reduce in strength and the sunspot number reduces for a further 7–8 years to a point when the sun’s face can be totally devoid of spots –called sunspot minimum.