incidentally, richard feynman in his famous feynman lectures on physics made this mistake and used 29.5 days as the moon’s orbital period – but he was a world-famous physicist, not an astronomer, so perhaps he can be forgiven!) using these values, we can calculate the constant of proportionality that applies to satellites around the earth: k ! (27.32)2/(384 400)3 ! 1.314 " 10#14. for our geostationary satellite, t is 1, so we derive “‘a’ from: 1 ! k " a3 a ! (1/k)1/3 ! 42 377 km. the surface of the earth is 6400 km from the centre, so geostationary satellites are ∼36 000 km above the surface of the earth. 1.8 measuring the astronomical unit a highly signiﬁ cant result of the third law is that it enabled astronomers to make a very accurate map of the solar system. the relative positions of the planets could be plotted precisely, but the map had no scale.
it was like having a very good map of a country but not knowing, for example, how many centimetres on the map related to 1 km on the ground. a way to solve this problem would be to make an accurate measurement of one reasonably large distance across the area covered 24 introduction to astronomy and cosmology by the map. this would then give the scale, and thus the distance between any other two points on the map could be found. in the case of the solar system, the obvious measurement to make was the distance between the earth and either of its two nearest planets, venus or mars. initially this was attempted by the use of parallax: the slight difference in direc- tion of an object when viewed from different locations. in principle, the position of a planet, as seen against the backdrop of the distant stars, would be different when observed from separate locations on earth. the problem is that the widest separation possible on the earth is approximately its diameter, 12 756 km, which is small compared with the distances of the planets. the angular difference that has to be measured is thus very small and prone to errors.
in 1672, the italian observer cassini observed mars from paris whilst a col- league observed it from french guiana in south america (figure 1.15). they were able to measure its parallax, and hence measure the earth–mars distance. using kepler’s third law they were then able to calculate the earth’s distance from the sun, and derived a value of 140 million km. later astronomers observed the transit of venus, two of which occur each cen- tury. by timing (from locations all over the earth) when venus ﬁ rst entered the sun’s limb and then just before it left, one can measure the parallax of venus and hence ﬁ nd its distance. the value deduced from both the eighteenth century tran- sits was 152.4 million km (figure 1.16). a truly accurate measurement had to wait until 1962, when powerful radars using large radio telescopes in the usa, russia and at jodrell bank in the uk, were able to obtain echoes from the surface of venus. the accepted value now is 149 597 870.691 km, just less than 150 million km or 93 million miles.
figure 1.15 cassini’s measurement of the distance to mars. [image: introduction_to_astronomy_and_cosmology_page45_img1.jpeg] astronomy, an observational science 25 1.9 isaac newton and his universal law of gravity isaac newton was born in the manor house of woolsthorpe, near grantham, in 1642, the same year galileo died. his father, also called isaac newton, had died before his birth and his mother, hannah, married the minister of a nearby church when isaac was 2 years old. isaac was left in the care of his grandmother and effec- tively treated as an orphan. he attended the free grammar school in grantham but showed little promise in academic work and his school reports described him as ‘idle’ and ‘inattentive’. his mother later took isaac away from school to manage her property and land, but he soon showed that he had little talent and no interest in managing an estate. an uncle persuaded his mother that isaac should prepare for entering university and so, in 1660, he was allowed to return to the free grammar school in grantham to complete his school education.