the fact that the new planet had been charted, if not recognised as a planet, many times over the previ- ous century allowed an accurate orbit to be computed and, later, this was to be a major factor in the discovery of neptune. herschel quickly received acclaim and was made a fellow of the royal society. the new planet became known as uranus despite herschel’s wish for it to be named georgium sidus (george’s star) after the king of england (a fellow hanoverian). in 1782 herschel demonstrated his telescope to the king and soon received a royal our solar system 2 – the planets 119 pension to allow him to devote himself exclusively to astronomy. five years later, caroline, who had become his observing assistant, also received a royal pension. to supplement their royal income herschel made and sold telescopes including a 25ft (∼7.6 m) long telescope that he made for the madrid observatory and for which he received £3000. in today’s money this would be equivalent to at least £100 000!
uranus revolves around the sun once every 84 earth years at an average dis- tance from the sun of roughly 3 billion km. the surface cloud layers are seen to rotate with a period of as little as 14 h, but this is due to high winds in the upper atmosphere and the nominal rotational period of uranus is 17 h 14 min. whilst for the majority of planets the rotation axis is roughly at right angles to the plane of the solar system, uranus has an axial tilt of 98°, so in effect ‘rolls’ around the sun. each pole gets around 42 years of continuous sunlight followed by 42 years of darkness. in contrast to the earth, this makes the poles warmer than the equator. uranus is the least massive of the giant planets at 14.5 earth masses and has the second lowest density (1290 kg m!3). it probably has a central rocky core of about 2 earth masses above which is a mixture of various ices, such as water, ammonia, and methane, along with an outer gaseous layer made up of about 1 earth mass of hydrogen and helium.
as the ices make up a far greater propor- tion of its mass than gas, uranus is often termed an ice giant rather than a gas giant. the rings of uranus on march 10, 1977, observations were to be made of the occultation by uranus of a star, sao 158687, using a telescope mounted in the kuiper airborne obser- vatory. an occultation of a star occurs when the disc of the moon or a planet passes in front of a star. an aircraft was used to observe the occultation partly to be above much of the earth’s atmosphere but also to bring the telescope to the narrow path across the earth where the occultation could be observed. just before the star’s light is lost its light will have passed through the atmosphere of uranus and comparing the spectra of the stars at this time with that prior to the occulta- tion it is possible to learn about the planet’s atmosphere. the telescope was observing the star well before the expected time of occulta- tion when the astronomers were somewhat perturbed as the star’s light suddenly disappeared. the signal did return after a rather tense period but this was then followed by four partial losses of signal.
now reasonably conﬁ dent that it was not their equipment that was faulty, the astronomers continued to observe the star fol- lowing the occultation when the sequence was seen to repeat in the inverse order. the astronomers realised that the light from the star must have been eclipsed by material in ﬁ ve rings about uranus with the outermost (called the epsilon ring) being the thickest. from the times of the ring’s occultations they could calculate 120 introduction to astronomy and cosmology the diameters of the rings and found that the outermost was ∼44 000 km from the centre of uranus. the rings were directly imaged when voyager 2 passed uranus in 1986 and more rings were discovered bringing the number up to 11 (figure 3.21). in decem- ber 2005, the hubble space telescope detected a pair of previously unknown rings which brought the number of rings to 13. these latter two lie considerably further out from uranus and are thus termed its ‘outer ring system’.